MATHEMATICS FOR
MACHINE LEARNING


Marc Peter Deisenroth
  A. Aldo Faisal Cheng Soon Ong












Contents


Foreword	1


Part I	Mathematical Foundations91	Introduction and Motivation111.1	Finding Words for Intuitions121.2	Two Ways to Read This Book131.3	Exercises and Feedback162	Linear Algebra172.1	Systems of Linear Equations192.2	Matrices222.3	Solving Systems of Linear Equations272.4	Vector Spaces352.5	Linear Independence402.6	Basis and Rank442.7	Linear Mappings482.8	Affine Spaces612.9	Further Reading63Exercises643	Analytic Geometry703.1	Norms713.2	Inner Products723.3	Lengths and Distances753.4	Angles and Orthogonality763.5	Orthonormal Basis783.6	Orthogonal Complement793.7	Inner Product of Functions803.8	Orthogonal Projections813.9	Rotations913.10 Further Reading94Exercises964	Matrix Decompositions984.1	Determinant and Trace99iThis material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.

ii	Contents

4.2 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors	105
4.3 Cholesky Decomposition	114
4.4 Eigendecomposition and Diagonalization	115
4.5 Singular Value Decomposition	119
4.6 Matrix Approximation	129
4.7 Matrix Phylogeny	134
4.8 Further Reading	135
Exercises	137
5 Vector Calculus	139
5.1 Differentiation of Univariate Functions	141
5.2 Partial Differentiation and Gradients	146
5.3 Gradients of Vector-Valued Functions	149
5.4 Gradients of Matrices	155
5.5 Useful Identities for Computing Gradients	158
5.6 Backpropagation and Automatic Differentiation	159
5.7 Higher-Order Derivatives	164
5.8 Linearization and Multivariate Taylor Series	165
5.9 Further Reading	170
Exercises	170
6 Probability and Distributions	172
6.1 Construction of a Probability Space	172
6.2 Discrete and Continuous Probabilities	178
6.3 Sum Rule, Product Rule, and Bayes' Theorem	183
6.4 Summary Statistics and Independence	186
6.5 Gaussian Distribution	197
6.6 Conjugacy and the Exponential Family	205
6.7 Change of Variables/Inverse Transform	214
6.8 Further Reading	221
Exercises	222
7 Continuous Optimization	225
7.1 Optimization Using Gradient Descent	227
7.2 Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multipliers	233
7.3 Convex Optimization	236
7.4 Further Reading	246
Exercises	247
Part II	Central Machine Learning Problems	249
8 When Models Meet Data	251
8.1 Data, Models, and Learning	251
8.2 Empirical Risk Minimization	258
8.3 Parameter Estimation	265
8.4 Probabilistic Modeling and Inference	272
8.5 Directed Graphical Models	278
Draft (2023-10-18) of "Mathematics for Machine Learning". Feedback: https://mml-book.com.
Contents	iii
8.6 Model Selection	283
9 Linear Regression	289
9.1 Problem Formulation	291
9.2 Parameter Estimation	292
9.3 Bayesian Linear Regression	303
9.4 Maximum Likelihood as Orthogonal Projection	313
9.5 Further Reading	315
10 Dimensionality Reduction with Principal Component Analysis	317
10.1 Problem Setting	318
10.2 Maximum Variance Perspective	320
10.3 Projection Perspective	325
10.4 Eigenvector Computation and Low-Rank Approximations	333
10.5 PCA in High Dimensions	335
10.6 Key Steps of PCA in Practice	336
10.7 Latent Variable Perspective	339
10.8 Further Reading	343
11 Density Estimation with Gaussian Mixture Models	348
11.1 Gaussian Mixture Model	349
11.2 Parameter Learning via Maximum Likelihood	350
11.3 EM Algorithm	360
11.4 Latent-Variable Perspective	363
11.5 Further Reading	368
12 Classification with Support Vector Machines	370
12.1 Separating Hyperplanes	372
12.2 Primal Support Vector Machine	374
12.3 Dual Support Vector Machine	383
12.4 Kernels	388
12.5 Numerical Solution	390
12.6 Further Reading	392
References	395
Index	407












(c)2023 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. Published by Cambridge University Press (2020).











Foreword


Machine learning is the latest in a long line of attempts to distill human knowledge and reasoning into a form that is suitable for constructing ma- chines and engineering automated systems. As machine learning becomes more ubiquitous and its software packages become easier to use, it is nat- ural and desirable that the low-level technical details are abstracted away and hidden from the practitioner. However, this brings with it the danger that a practitioner becomes unaware of the design decisions and, hence, the limits of machine learning algorithms.
  The enthusiastic practitioner who is interested to learn more about the magic behind successful machine learning algorithms currently faces a daunting set of pre-requisite knowledge:

Programming languages and data analysis tools
Large-scale computation and the associated frameworks Mathematics and statistics and how machine learning builds on it
At universities, introductory courses on machine learning tend to spend early parts of the course covering some of these pre-requisites. For histori- cal reasons, courses in machine learning tend to be taught in the computer science department, where students are often trained in the first two areas of knowledge, but not so much in mathematics and statistics.
  Current machine learning textbooks primarily focus on machine learn- ing algorithms and methodologies and assume that the reader is com- petent in mathematics and statistics. Therefore, these books only spend one or two chapters on background mathematics, either at the beginning of the book or as appendices. We have found many people who want to delve into the foundations of basic machine learning methods who strug- gle with the mathematical knowledge required to read a machine learning textbook. Having taught undergraduate and graduate courses at universi- ties, we find that the gap between high school mathematics and the math- ematics level required to read a standard machine learning textbook is too big for many people.
  This book brings the mathematical foundations of basic machine learn- ing concepts to the fore and collects the information in a single place so that this skills gap is narrowed or even closed.
1
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.















"Math is linked in the popular mind with phobia and anxiety. You'd think we're discussing spiders." (Strogatz, 2014, page 281)
2 
Foreword
Why Another Book on Machine Learning?
Machine learning builds upon the language of mathematics to express concepts that seem intuitively obvious but that are surprisingly difficult to formalize. Once formalized properly, we can gain insights into the task we want to solve. One common complaint of students of mathematics around the globe is that the topics covered seem to have little relevance to practical problems. We believe that machine learning is an obvious and direct motivation for people to learn mathematics.
  This book is intended to be a guidebook to the vast mathematical lit- erature that forms the foundations of modern machine learning. We mo- tivate the need for mathematical concepts by directly pointing out their usefulness in the context of fundamental machine learning problems. In the interest of keeping the book short, many details and more advanced concepts have been left out. Equipped with the basic concepts presented here, and how they fit into the larger context of machine learning, the reader can find numerous resources for further study, which we provide at the end of the respective chapters. For readers with a mathematical back- ground, this book provides a brief but precisely stated glimpse of machine learning. In contrast to other books that focus on methods and models of machine learning (MacKay, 2003; Bishop, 2006; Alpaydin, 2010; Bar- ber, 2012; Murphy, 2012; Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014; Rogers and Girolami, 2016) or programmatic aspects of machine learning (Mu¨ller and Guido, 2016; Raschka and Mirjalili, 2017; Chollet and Allaire, 2018), we provide only four representative examples of machine learning algo- rithms. Instead, we focus on the mathematical concepts behind the models themselves. We hope that readers will be able to gain a deeper understand- ing of the basic questions in machine learning and connect practical ques- tions arising from the use of machine learning with fundamental choices in the mathematical model.
We do not aim to write a classical machine learning book. Instead, our
intention is to provide the mathematical background, applied to four cen- tral machine learning problems, to make it easier to read other machine learning textbooks.

Who Is the Target Audience?
As applications of machine learning become widespread in society, we believe that everybody should have some understanding of its underlying principles. This book is written in an academic mathematical style, which enables us to be precise about the concepts behind machine learning. We encourage readers unfamiliar with this seemingly terse style to persevere and to keep the goals of each topic in mind. We sprinkle comments and remarks throughout the text, in the hope that it provides useful guidance with respect to the big picture.
The book assumes the reader to have mathematical knowledge commonly

covered in high school mathematics and physics. For example, the reader should have seen derivatives and integrals before, and geometric vectors in two or three dimensions. Starting from there, we generalize these con- cepts. Therefore, the target audience of the book includes undergraduate university students, evening learners and learners participating in online machine learning courses.
  In analogy to music, there are three types of interaction that people have with machine learning:
  Astute Listener The democratization of machine learning by the pro- vision of open-source software, online tutorials and cloud-based tools al- lows users to not worry about the specifics of pipelines. Users can focus on extracting insights from data using off-the-shelf tools. This enables non- tech-savvy domain experts to benefit from machine learning. This is sim- ilar to listening to music; the user is able to choose and discern between different types of machine learning, and benefits from it. More experi- enced users are like music critics, asking important questions about the application of machine learning in society such as ethics, fairness, and pri- vacy of the individual. We hope that this book provides a foundation for thinking about the certification and risk management of machine learning systems, and allows them to use their domain expertise to build better machine learning systems.
Experienced Artist  Skilled practitioners of machine learning can plug
and play different tools and libraries into an analysis pipeline. The stereo- typical practitioner would be a data scientist or engineer who understands machine learning interfaces and their use cases, and is able to perform wonderful feats of prediction from data. This is similar to a virtuoso play- ing music, where highly skilled practitioners can bring existing instru- ments to life and bring enjoyment to their audience. Using the mathe- matics presented here as a primer, practitioners would be able to under- stand the benefits and limits of their favorite method, and to extend and generalize existing machine learning algorithms. We hope that this book provides the impetus for more rigorous and principled development of machine learning methods.
  Fledgling Composer As machine learning is applied to new domains, developers of machine learning need to develop new methods and extend existing algorithms. They are often researchers who need to understand the mathematical basis of machine learning and uncover relationships be- tween different tasks. This is similar to composers of music who, within the rules and structure of musical theory, create new and amazing pieces. We hope this book provides a high-level overview of other technical books for people who want to become composers of machine learning. There is a great need in society for new researchers who are able to propose and explore novel approaches for attacking the many challenges of learning from data.

4	Foreword
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to many people who looked at early drafts of the book and suffered through painful expositions of concepts. We tried to imple- ment their ideas that we did not vehemently disagree with. We would like to especially acknowledge Christfried Webers for his careful reading of many parts of the book, and his detailed suggestions on structure and presentation. Many friends and colleagues have also been kind enough to provide their time and energy on different versions of each chapter. We have been lucky to benefit from the generosity of the online commu- nity, who have suggested improvements via https://github.com, which greatly improved the book.
  The following people have found bugs, proposed clarifications and sug- gested relevant literature, either via https://github.com or personal communication. Their names are sorted alphabetically.


Abdul-Ganiy Usman Adam Gaier
Adele Jackson Aditya Menon Alasdair Tran Aleksandar Krnjaic
Alexander Makrigiorgos Alfredo Canziani
Ali Shafti Amr Khalifa
Andrew Tanggara Angus Gruen Antal A. Buss
Antoine Toisoul Le Cann Areg Sarvazyan
Artem Artemev Artyom Stepanov Bill Kromydas Bob Williamson Boon Ping Lim Chao Qu
Cheng Li Chris Sherlock
Christopher Gray Daniel McNamara Daniel Wood Darren Siegel David Johnston Dawei Chen

Ellen Broad Fengkuangtian Zhu Fiona Condon Georgios Theodorou He Xin
Irene Raissa Kameni Jakub Nabaglo James Hensman Jamie Liu
Jean Kaddour Jean-Paul Ebejer Jerry Qiang Jitesh Sindhare John Lloyd Jonas Ngnawe Jon Martin Justin Hsi
Kai Arulkumaran Kamil Dreczkowski Lily Wang
Lionel Tondji Ngoupeyou Lydia Knu¨fing
Mahmoud Aslan Mark Hartenstein Mark van der Wilk Markus Hegland Martin Hewing Matthew Alger Matthew Lee

Maximus McCann Mengyan Zhang Michael Bennett Michael Pedersen Minjeong Shin
Mohammad Malekzadeh Naveen Kumar
Nico Montali Oscar Armas Patrick Henriksen
Patrick Wieschollek Pattarawat Chormai Paul Kelly
Petros Christodoulou Piotr Januszewski Pranav Subramani Quyu Kong
Ragib Zaman Rui Zhang
Ryan-Rhys Griffiths Salomon Kabongo Samuel Ogunmola Sandeep Mavadia Sarvesh Nikumbh Sebastian Raschka
Senanayak Sesh Kumar Karri Seung-Heon Baek
Shahbaz Chaudhary

Shakir Mohamed Shawn Berry
Sheikh Abdul Raheem Ali Sheng Xue
Sridhar Thiagarajan Syed Nouman Hasany Szymon Brych Thomas Bu¨hler
Timur Sharapov Tom Melamed Vincent Adam Vincent Dutordoir Vu Minh
Wasim Aftab Wen Zhi
Wojciech Stokowiec Xiaonan Chong Xiaowei Zhang Yazhou Hao Yicheng Luo
Young Lee Yu Lu
Yun Cheng Yuxiao Huang Zac Cranko Zijian Cao Zoe Nolan


  Contributors through GitHub, whose real names were not listed on their GitHub profile, are:


SamDataMad bumptiousmonkey idoamihai deepakiim

insad HorizonP cs-maillist kudo23

empet victorBigand 17SKYE
jessjing1995


  We are also very grateful to Parameswaran Raman and the many anony- mous reviewers, organized by Cambridge University Press, who read one or more chapters of earlier versions of the manuscript, and provided con- structive criticism that led to considerable improvements. A special men- tion goes to Dinesh Singh Negi, our LATEX support, for detailed and prompt advice about LATEX-related issues. Last but not least, we are very grateful to our editor Lauren Cowles, who has been patiently guiding us through the gestation process of this book.

6	Foreword
Table of Symbols

Symbol	Typical meaning

a, b, c, a, ß, ?	Scalars are lowercase
x, y, z	Vectors are bold lowercase
A, B, C	Matrices are bold uppercase
x?, A?	Transpose of a vector or matrix
A-1	Inverse of a matrix
x, y	Inner product of x and y
x?y	Dot product of x and y
B = (b1, b2, b3)	(Ordered) tuple
B = [b1, b2, b3]	Matrix of column vectors stacked horizontally
=  b1, b2, b3	Set of vectors (unordered)
Z, N	Integers and natural numbers, respectively
R, C	Real and complex numbers, respectively
Rn	n-dimensional vector space of real numbers
x	Universal quantifier: for all x
x	Existential quantifier: there exists x
a := b	a is defined as b
a =: b	b is defined as a
a	b	a is proportional to b, i.e., a = constant b
g	f	Function composition: "g after f " If and only if
=	Implies
,	Sets
a	a is an element of set Empty set
without	: the set of elements in	but not in
D	Number of dimensions; indexed by d = 1, . . . , D
N	Number of data points; indexed by n = 1, . . . , N
Im	Identity matrix of size m	m
0m,n	Matrix of zeros of size m	n
1m,n	Matrix of ones of size m	n
ei	Standard/canonical vector (where i is the component that is 1)
dim	Dimensionality of vector space
rk(A)	Rank of matrix A
Im(F)	Image of linear mapping F
ker(F)	Kernel (null space) of a linear mapping F span[b1]	Span (generating set) of b1
tr(A)	Trace of A
det(A)	Determinant of A
Absolute value or determinant (depending on context)
Norm; Euclidean, unless specified
?	Eigenvalue or Lagrange multiplier
E?	Eigenspace corresponding to eigenvalue ?



Symbol	Typical meaning

x	y	Vectors x and y are orthogonal
V	Vector space
V ?	Orthogonal complement of vector space V

n=1 xn

Sum of the xn: x1

+ . . . + xN

n=1 xn

Product of the xn

: x1 · . . . · xN

?	Parameter vector
?f	Partial derivative of f with respect to x
df	Total derivative of f with respect to x
?	Gradient
f* = minx f (x)	The smallest function value of f
x*	arg minx f (x)	The value x* that minimizes f (note: arg min returns a set of values)
L	Lagrangian

(Ln)

Negative log-likelihood Binomial coefficient, n choose k

VX[x]	Variance of x with respect to the random variable X
EX[x]	Expectation of x with respect to the random variable X
CovX,Y [x, y]	Covariance between x and y.
X ? Y | Z	X is conditionally independent of Y given Z
Random variable X is distributed according to p
X (~ p )

Ber(µ)	Bernoulli distribution with parameter µ Bin(N, µ)	Binomial distribution with parameters N, µ Beta(a, ß)	Beta distribution with parameters a, ß

Table of Abbreviations and Acronyms

Acronym	Meaning

e.g.	Exempli gratia (Latin: for example)
GMM	Gaussian mixture model
i.e.	Id est (Latin: this means)
i.i.d.	Independent, identically distributed MAP	Maximum a posteriori
MLE	Maximum likelihood estimation/estimator ONB	Orthonormal basis
PCA	Principal component analysis
PPCA	Probabilistic principal component analysis REF	Row-echelon form
SPD	Symmetric, positive definite SVM	Support vector machine






Part I


Mathematical Foundations







1


Introduction and Motivation



Machine learning is about designing algorithms that automatically extract valuable information from data. The emphasis here is on "automatic", i.e., machine learning is concerned about general-purpose methodologies that can be applied to many datasets, while producing something that is mean- ingful. There are three concepts that are at the core of machine learning: data, a model, and learning.

  Since machine learning is inherently data driven, data is at the core	data of machine learning. The goal of machine learning is to design general- purpose methodologies to extract valuable patterns from data, ideally without much domain-specific expertise. For example, given a large corpus
of documents (e.g., books in many libraries), machine learning methods can be used to automatically find relevant topics that are shared across documents (Hoffman et al., 2010). To achieve this goal, we design mod-
els that are typically related to the process that generates data, similar to  model
the dataset we are given. For example, in a regression setting, the model would describe a function that maps inputs to real-valued outputs. To paraphrase Mitchell (1997): A model is said to learn from data if its per- formance on a given task improves after the data is taken into account. The goal is to find good models that generalize well to yet unseen data,
which we may care about in the future. Learning can be understood as a	learning way to automatically find patterns and structure in data by optimizing the parameters of the model.

  While machine learning has seen many success stories, and software is readily available to design and train rich and flexible machine learning systems, we believe that the mathematical foundations of machine learn- ing are important in order to understand fundamental principles upon which more complicated machine learning systems are built. Understand- ing these principles can facilitate creating new machine learning solutions, understanding and debugging existing approaches, and learning about the inherent assumptions and limitations of the methodologies we are work- ing with.











predictor




training















data as vectors






model







learning
1.1 
Finding Words for Intuitions
A challenge we face regularly in machine learning is that concepts and words are slippery, and a particular component of the machine learning system can be abstracted to different mathematical concepts. For example, the word "algorithm" is used in at least two different senses in the con- text of machine learning. In the first sense, we use the phrase "machine learning algorithm" to mean a system that makes predictions based on in- put data. We refer to these algorithms as predictors. In the second sense, we use the exact same phrase "machine learning algorithm" to mean a system that adapts some internal parameters of the predictor so that it performs well on future unseen input data. Here we refer to this adapta- tion as training a system.
  This book will not resolve the issue of ambiguity, but we want to high- light upfront that, depending on the context, the same expressions can mean different things. However, we attempt to make the context suffi- ciently clear to reduce the level of ambiguity.
  The first part of this book introduces the mathematical concepts and foundations needed to talk about the three main components of a machine learning system: data, models, and learning. We will briefly outline these components here, and we will revisit them again in Chapter 8 once we have discussed the necessary mathematical concepts.
  While not all data is numerical, it is often useful to consider data in a number format. In this book, we assume that data has already been appropriately converted into a numerical representation suitable for read- ing into a computer program. Therefore, we think of data as vectors. As another illustration of how subtle words are, there are (at least) three different ways to think about vectors: a vector as an array of numbers (a computer science view), a vector as an arrow with a direction and magni- tude (a physics view), and a vector as an object that obeys addition and scaling (a mathematical view).
  A model is typically used to describe a process for generating data, sim- ilar to the dataset at hand. Therefore, good models can also be thought of as simplified versions of the real (unknown) data-generating process, capturing aspects that are relevant for modeling the data and extracting hidden patterns from it. A good model can then be used to predict what would happen in the real world without performing real-world experi- ments.
  We now come to the crux of the matter, the learning component of machine learning. Assume we are given a dataset and a suitable model. Training the model means to use the data available to optimize some pa- rameters of the model with respect to a utility function that evaluates how well the model predicts the training data. Most training methods can be thought of as an approach analogous to climbing a hill to reach its peak. In this analogy, the peak of the hill corresponds to a maximum of some

desired performance measure. However, in practice, we are interested in the model to perform well on unseen data. Performing well on data that we have already seen (training data) may only mean that we found a good way to memorize the data. However, this may not generalize well to unseen data, and, in practical applications, we often need to expose our machine learning system to situations that it has not encountered before.
  Let us summarize the main concepts of machine learning that we cover in this book:
We represent data as vectors.
We choose an appropriate model, either using the probabilistic or opti- mization view.
We learn from available data by using numerical optimization methods with the aim that the model performs well on data not used for training.


1.2 Two Ways to Read This Book
We can consider two strategies for understanding the mathematics for machine learning:
Bottom-up: Building up the concepts from foundational to more ad- vanced. This is often the preferred approach in more technical fields, such as mathematics. This strategy has the advantage that the reader at all times is able to rely on their previously learned concepts. Unfor- tunately, for a practitioner many of the foundational concepts are not particularly interesting by themselves, and the lack of motivation means that most foundational definitions are quickly forgotten.
Top-down: Drilling down from practical needs to more basic require- ments. This goal-driven approach has the advantage that the readers know at all times why they need to work on a particular concept, and there is a clear path of required knowledge. The downside of this strat- egy is that the knowledge is built on potentially shaky foundations, and the readers have to remember a set of words that they do not have any way of understanding.
We decided to write this book in a modular way to separate foundational (mathematical) concepts from applications so that this book can be read in both ways. The book is split into two parts, where Part I lays the math- ematical foundations and Part II applies the concepts from Part I to a set of fundamental machine learning problems, which form four pillars of machine learning as illustrated in Figure 1.1: regression, dimensionality reduction, density estimation, and classification. Chapters in Part I mostly build upon the previous ones, but it is possible to skip a chapter and work backward if necessary. Chapters in Part II are only loosely coupled and can be read in any order. There are many pointers forward and backward


Figure 1.1 The foundations and four pillars of machine learning.











between the two parts of the book to link mathematical concepts with machine learning algorithms.
  Of course there are more than two ways to read this book. Most readers learn using a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches, some- times building up basic mathematical skills before attempting more com- plex concepts, but also choosing topics based on applications of machine learning.









linear algebra








analytic geometry


matrix

Part I Is about Mathematics
The four pillars of machine learning we cover in this book (see Figure 1.1) require a solid mathematical foundation, which is laid out in Part I.
  We represent numerical data as vectors and represent a table of such data as a matrix. The study of vectors and matrices is called linear algebra, which we introduce in Chapter 2. The collection of vectors as a matrix is also described there.
  Given two vectors representing two objects in the real world, we want to make statements about their similarity. The idea is that vectors that are similar should be predicted to have similar outputs by our machine learning algorithm (our predictor). To formalize the idea of similarity be- tween vectors, we need to introduce operations that take two vectors as input and return a numerical value representing their similarity. The con- struction of similarity and distances is central to analytic geometry and is discussed in Chapter 3.
  In Chapter 4, we introduce some fundamental concepts about matri- ces and matrix decomposition. Some operations on matrices are extremely

decomposition	useful in machine learning, and they allow for an intuitive interpretation
of the data and more efficient learning.
  We often consider data to be noisy observations of some true underly- ing signal. We hope that by applying machine learning we can identify the signal from the noise. This requires us to have a language for quantify- ing what "noise" means. We often would also like to have predictors that

allow us to express some sort of uncertainty, e.g., to quantify the confi- dence we have about the value of the prediction at a particular test data
point. Quantification of uncertainty is the realm of probability theory and	probability theory
is covered in Chapter 6.
  To train machine learning models, we typically find parameters that maximize some performance measure. Many optimization techniques re- quire the concept of a gradient, which tells us the direction in which to
search for a solution. Chapter 5 is about vector calculus and details the	vector calculus
concept of gradients, which we subsequently use in Chapter 7, where we
talk about optimization to find maxima/minima of functions.	optimization
Part II Is about Machine Learning
The second part of the book introduces four pillars of machine learning as shown in Figure 1.1. We illustrate how the mathematical concepts in- troduced in the first part of the book are the foundation for each pillar. Broadly speaking, chapters are ordered by difficulty (in ascending order). In Chapter 8, we restate the three components of machine learning (data, models, and parameter estimation) in a mathematical fashion. In addition, we provide some guidelines for building experimental set-ups that guard against overly optimistic evaluations of machine learning sys- tems. Recall that the goal is to build a predictor that performs well on
unseen data.
In Chapter 9, we will have a close look at linear regression, where our linear regression
objective is to find functions that map inputs x RD to corresponding ob- served function values y  R, which we can interpret as the labels of their respective inputs. We will discuss classical model fitting (parameter esti- mation) via maximum likelihood and maximum a posteriori estimation, as well as Bayesian linear regression, where we integrate the parameters out instead of optimizing them.
Chapter 10 focuses on dimensionality reduction, the second pillar in Fig-  dimensionality

ure 1.1, using principal component analysis. The key objective of dimen- sionality reduction is to find a compact, lower-dimensional representation of high-dimensional data x RD, which is often easier to analyze than the original data. Unlike regression, dimensionality reduction is only con- cerned about modeling the data - there are no labels associated with a data point x.

reduction

In Chapter 11, we will move to our third pillar: density estimation. The  density estimation
objective of density estimation is to find a probability distribution that de- scribes a given dataset. We will focus on Gaussian mixture models for this purpose, and we will discuss an iterative scheme to find the parameters of this model. As in dimensionality reduction, there are no labels associated with the data points x RD. However, we do not seek a low-dimensional representation of the data. Instead, we are interested in a density model that describes the data.
Chapter 12 concludes the book with an in-depth discussion of the fourth


classification

pillar: classification. We will discuss classification in the context of support vector machines. Similar to regression (Chapter 9), we have inputs x and corresponding labels y. However, unlike regression, where the labels were real-valued, the labels in classification are integers, which requires special care.

1.3 Exercises and Feedback
We provide some exercises in Part I, which can be done mostly by pen and paper. For Part II, we provide programming tutorials (jupyter notebooks) to explore some properties of the machine learning algorithms we discuss in this book.
  We appreciate that Cambridge University Press strongly supports our aim to democratize education and learning by making this book freely available for download at
https://mml-book.com
where tutorials, errata, and additional materials can be found. Mistakes can be reported and feedback provided using the preceding URL.




2


Linear Algebra




When formalizing intuitive concepts, a common approach is to construct a set of objects (symbols) and a set of rules to manipulate these objects. This
is known as an algebra. Linear algebra is the study of vectors and certain	algebra
rules to manipulate vectors. The vectors many of us know from school are called "geometric vectors", which are usually denoted by a small arrow
above the letter, e.g., ?-x and ?-y . In this book, we discuss more general
concepts of vectors and use a bold letter to represent them, e.g., x and y. In general, vectors are special objects that can be added together and multiplied by scalars to produce another object of the same kind. From an abstract mathematical viewpoint, any object that satisfies these two properties can be considered a vector. Here are some examples of such
vector objects:
1. Geometric vectors. This example of a vector may be familiar from high school mathematics and physics. Geometric vectors - see Figure 2.1(a) - are directed segments, which can be drawn (at least in two dimen- sions). Two geometric vectors ?x, ?y can be added, such that ?x + ?y = ?z is another geometric vector. Furthermore, multiplication by a scalar ? ?x, ?  R, is also a geometric vector. In fact, it is the original vector scaled by ?. Therefore, geometric vectors are instances of the vector concepts introduced previously. Interpreting vectors as geometric vec- tors enables us to use our intuitions about direction and magnitude to reason about mathematical operations.
2. Polynomials are also vectors; see Figure 2.1(b): Two polynomials can






?x



(a) Geometric vectors.


4

2

0

-2
-4
-6	2	0	2
x
(b) Polynomials.

Figure 2.1 Different types of vectors. Vectors can be surprising objects, including
(a) geometric vectors
and (b) polynomials.



17
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.

be added together, which results in another polynomial; and they can be multiplied by a scalar ? R, and the result is a polynomial as well. Therefore, polynomials are (rather unusual) instances of vectors. Note that polynomials are very different from geometric vectors. While geometric vectors are concrete "drawings", polynomials are abstract concepts. However, they are both vectors in the sense previously de- scribed.
3. Audio signals are vectors. Audio signals are represented as a series of numbers. We can add audio signals together, and their sum is a new audio signal. If we scale an audio signal, we also obtain an audio signal. Therefore, audio signals are a type of vector, too.
4. Elements of Rn (tuples of n real numbers) are vectors. Rn is more abstract than polynomials, and it is the concept we focus on in this book. For instance,


1
R3
3


(2.1)







Be careful to check whether array operations actually perform vector operations when implementing on a computer.
Pavel Grinfeld's series on linear algebra: http://tinyurl. com/nahclwm Gilbert Strang's course on linear algebra: http://tinyurl. com/29p5q8j
3Blue1Brown series on linear algebra: https://tinyurl. com/h5g4kps

is an example of a triplet of numbers. Adding two vectors a, b Rn component-wise results in another vector: a + b = c Rn. Moreover, multiplying a Rn by ? R results in a scaled vector ?a Rn. Considering vectors as elements of Rn has an additional benefit that it loosely corresponds to arrays of real numbers on a computer. Many programming languages support array operations, which allow for con- venient implementation of algorithms that involve vector operations.

Linear algebra focuses on the similarities between these vector concepts. We can add them together and multiply them by scalars. We will largely focus on vectors in Rn since most algorithms in linear algebra are for- mulated in Rn. We will see in Chapter 8 that we often consider data to be represented as vectors in Rn. In this book, we will focus on finite- dimensional vector spaces, in which case there is a 1:1 correspondence between any kind of vector and Rn. When it is convenient, we will use intuitions about geometric vectors and consider array-based algorithms.
  One major idea in mathematics is the idea of "closure". This is the ques- tion: What is the set of all things that can result from my proposed oper- ations? In the case of vectors: What is the set of vectors that can result by starting with a small set of vectors, and adding them to each other and scaling them? This results in a vector space (Section 2.4). The concept of a vector space and its properties underlie much of machine learning. The concepts introduced in this chapter are summarized in Figure 2.2.
  This chapter is mostly based on the lecture notes and books by Drumm and Weil (2001), Strang (2003), Hogben (2013), Liesen and Mehrmann (2015), as well as Pavel Grinfeld's Linear Algebra series. Other excellent


Figure 2.2 A mind map of the concepts introduced in this chapter, along with where they are used in other parts of the book.












resources are Gilbert Strang's Linear Algebra course at MIT and the Linear Algebra Series by 3Blue1Brown.
  Linear algebra plays an important role in machine learning and gen- eral mathematics. The concepts introduced in this chapter are further ex- panded to include the idea of geometry in Chapter 3. In Chapter 5, we will discuss vector calculus, where a principled knowledge of matrix op- erations is essential. In Chapter 10, we will use projections (to be intro- duced in Section 3.8) for dimensionality reduction with principal compo- nent analysis (PCA). In Chapter 9, we will discuss linear regression, where linear algebra plays a central role for solving least-squares problems.


2.1 Systems of Linear Equations
Systems of linear equations play a central part of linear algebra. Many problems can be formulated as systems of linear equations, and linear algebra gives us the tools for solving them.






system of linear

Equation (2.3) is the general form of a system of linear equations, and

equations	x1, . . . , xn are the unknowns of this system. Every n-tuple (x1, . . . , xn) ?

solution

Rn that satisfies (2.3) is a solution of the linear equation system.





Figure 2.3 The solution space of a system of two linear equations with two variables can be geometrically interpreted as the intersection of two lines. Every linear equation represents a line.




  In general, for a real-valued system of linear equations we obtain either no, exactly one, or infinitely many solutions. Linear regression (Chapter 9) solves a version of Example 2.1 when we cannot solve the system of linear equations.
Remark (Geometric Interpretation of Systems of Linear Equations). In a system of linear equations with two variables x1, x2, each linear equation defines a line on the x1x2-plane. Since a solution to a system of linear equations must satisfy all equations simultaneously, the solution set is the intersection of these lines. This intersection set can be a line (if the linear equations describe the same line), a point, or empty (when the lines are parallel). An illustration is given in Figure 2.3 for the system


4x1 + 4x2 = 5
2x1 - 4x2 = 1


(2.8)


where the solution space is the point (x1, x2) = (1, 1 ). Similarly, for three variables, each linear equation determines a plane in three-dimensional space. When we intersect these planes, i.e., satisfy all linear equations at the same time, we can obtain a solution set that is a plane, a line, a point or empty (when the planes have no common intersection).	?
  For a systematic approach to solving systems of linear equations, we will introduce a useful compact notation. We collect the coefficients aij into vectors and collect the vectors into matrices. In other words, we write the system from (2.3) in the following form:

? a11 ?

? a12 ?

? a1n ?

? b1 ?

.
am1

?? x1 + ??

.
am2

?? x2 + · · · + ??

.
amn

?? xn = ?? . ??



(2.9)

?? a11	· · ·	a1n ? ?x1 ?

? b1 ?

?? ? .	. ?? ?? . ?? = ?? . ?? .	(2.10)
	
In the following, we will have a close look at these matrices and de- fine computation rules. We will return to solving linear equations in Sec- tion 2.3.












matrix
2.2 
Matrices
Matrices play a central role in linear algebra. They can be used to com- pactly represent systems of linear equations, but they also represent linear functions (linear mappings) as we will see later in Section 2.7. Before we discuss some of these interesting topics, let us first define what a matrix is and what kind of operations we can do with matrices. We will see more properties of matrices in Chapter 4.
Definition 2.1 (Matrix). With m, n N a real-valued (m, n) matrix A is an m n-tuple of elements aij, i = 1, . . . , m, j = 1, . . . , n, which is ordered according to a rectangular scheme consisting of m rows and n columns:
?? a11	a12	· · ·	a1n ??

A =	a21	a22	· · ·	a2n	,	a
?	?

? R .	(2.11)

?	?



row
column row vector
column vector Figure 2.4 By stacking its columns, a matrix A can be represented as a long vector a.
A ? R4×2	a ? R8

re-shape

am1	am2	· · ·  amn
By convention (1, n)-matrices are called rows and (m, 1)-matrices are called
columns. These special matrices are also called row/column vectors.
  Rm×n is the set of all real-valued (m, n)-matrices. A Rm×n can be equivalently represented as a Rmn by stacking all n columns of the matrix into a long vector; see Figure 2.4.

2.2.1 Matrix Addition and Multiplication
The sum of two matrices A Rm×n, B Rm×n is defined as the element- wise sum, i.e.,

?? a11 + b11	· · ·	a1n + b1n ??



Note the size of the matrices.
C =

am1 + bm1	· · ·  amn + bmn
For matrices A ? Rm×n, B ? Rn×k, the elements cij of the product
C = AB ? Rm×k are computed as
n

np.einsum('il,
lj', A, B)

cij

=	ail
l=1

blj

,	i = 1, . . . , m,	j = 1, . . . , k.	(2.13)

This means, to compute element cij we multiply the elements of the ith	There are n columns

row of A with the jth column of B and sum them up. Later in Section 3.2, we will call this the dot product of the corresponding row and column. In cases, where we need to be explicit that we are performing multiplication, we use the notation A · B to denote multiplication (explicitly showing "·").
Remark. Matrices can only be multiplied if their "neighboring" dimensions match. For instance, an n k-matrix A can be multiplied with a k m- matrix B, but only from the left side:

in A and n rows in B so that we can compute ailblj for l = 1, . . . , n.
Commonly, the dot product between two vectors a, b is denoted by a?b or
?a, b?.

A	B = C

(2.14)

..n..×,,k.. ..k..×,,m..	..n..×,,m..
The product BA is not defined if m ?= n since the neighboring dimensions do not match.	?
Remark. Matrix multiplication is not defined as an element-wise operation on matrix elements, i.e., cij = aijbij (even if the size of A, B was cho- sen appropriately). This kind of element-wise multiplication often appears in programming languages when we multiply (multi-dimensional) arrays
with each other, and is called a Hadamard product.	?	Hadamard product



  From this example, we can already see that matrix multiplication is not commutative, i.e., AB ?= BA; see also Figure 2.5 for an illustration.
Definition 2.2 (Identity Matrix). In Rn×n, we define the identity matrix
?1  0  · · ·  0  · · ·  0?
?0  1  · · ·  0  · · ·  0?

Figure 2.5 Even if
both matrix multiplications AB and BA are defined, the dimensions of the results can be different.

.
I  := ?

.	. . .

.	. . .

.	
? ? R	(2.17)

?0  0  · · ·  1  · · ·  0?
	
0  0  · · ·  0  · · ·  1






associativity



distributivity













A square matrix possesses the same number of columns and rows.

as the n × n-matrix containing 1 on the diagonal and 0 everywhere else.
  Now that we defined matrix multiplication, matrix addition and the identity matrix, let us have a look at some properties of matrices:
Associativity:
?A ? Rm×n, B ? Rn×p, C ? Rp×q : (AB)C = A(BC)	(2.18)
Distributivity:
?A, B ? Rm×n, C, D ? Rn×p : (A + B)C = AC + BC	(2.19a)
A(C + D) = AC + AD	(2.19b)
Multiplication with the identity matrix:
?A ? Rm×n : ImA = AIn = A	(2.20)
Note that Im ?= In for m ?= n.

2.2.2 Inverse and Transpose
Definition 2.3 (Inverse). Consider a square matrix A Rn×n. Let matrix B  Rn×n have the property that AB = In = BA. B is called the inverse of A and denoted by A-1.

inverse	Unfortunately, not every matrix A possesses an inverse A-1. If this

regular invertible nonsingular
singular noninvertible

inverse does exist, A is called regular/invertible/nonsingular, otherwise singular/noninvertible. When the matrix inverse exists, it is unique. In Sec- tion 2.3, we will discuss a general way to compute the inverse of a matrix by solving a system of linear equations.
Remark (Existence of the Inverse of a 2 × 2-matrix). Consider a matrix
A :=  a11	a12	R2×2 .	(2.21)
a21	a22

If we multiply A with


we obtain


A' :=	a22	-a12	(2.22)
-a21	a11

AA' =  a11a22 - a12a21	0
0	a11a22 - a12a21

l = (a11


a22

- a12


a21


)I .
(2.23)

Therefore,

A-1 = 	1	 ( a22	-a12l	(2.24)

a11a22 - a12a21  -a21	a11
if and only if a11a22 - a12a21 ?= 0. In Section 4.1, we will see that a11a22 -

a12a21 is the determinant of a 2 ×2-matrix. Furthermore, we can generally use the determinant to check whether a matrix is invertible.	?


Definition 2.4 (Transpose). For A	Rm×n the matrix B	Rn×m with
bij = aji is called the transpose of A. We write B = A?.	transpose

  In general, A? can be obtained by writing the columns of A as the rows of A?. The following are important properties of inverses and transposes:

AA-1 = I = A-1A	(2.26)
  (AB)-1 = B-1A-1		(2.27) (A + B)-1 ?= A-1 + B-1		(2.28) (A?)? = A	(2.29)
?	?  ?

The main diagonal (sometimes called "principal diagonal", "primary diagonal", "leading diagonal", or "major diagonal") of a matrix A is the collection of entries Aij where i = j.
The scalar case of (2.28) is
 1  = 1 ?= 1 + 1 .


(A + B)? = A? + B?	(2.31)
Definition 2.5 (Symmetric Matrix). A matrix A	Rn×n is symmetric if	symmetric matrix
A = A?.
Note that only (n, n)-matrices can be symmetric. Generally, we call
(n, n)-matrices also square matrices because they possess the same num-	square matrix
ber of rows and columns. Moreover, if A is invertible, then so is A?, and
(A-1)? = (A?)-1 =: A-?.
Remark (Sum and Product of Symmetric Matrices). The sum of symmet- ric matrices A, B Rn×n is always symmetric. However, although their product is always defined, it is generally not symmetric:
(1  0l (1  1l = (1  1l .	(2.32)
0  0	1  1	0  0
?

2.2.3 Multiplication by a Scalar
Let us look at what happens to matrices when they are multiplied by a scalar ? ? R. Let A ? Rm×n and ? ? R. Then ?A = K, Kij = ?aij. Practically, ? scales each element of A. For ?, ? ? R, the following holds:


associativity	Associativity:
(??)C = ?(?C),	C ? Rm×n
?(BC) = (?B)C = B(?C) = (BC)?,	B	Rm×n, C	Rn×k.
Note that this allows us to move scalar values around.

distributivity

(?C)? = C??? = C?? = ?C? since ? = ?? for all ? ? R.
Distributivity:
(? + ?)C = ?C + ?C,	C ? Rm×n
?(B + C) = ?B + ?C,	B, C ? Rm×n





2.2.4 Compact Representations of Systems of Linear Equations
If we consider the system of linear equations
2x1 + 3x2 + 5x3 = 1

4x1 - 2x2 - 7x3 = 8
9x1 + 5x2 - 3x3 = 2

(2.35)

and use the rules for matrix multiplication, we can write this equation system in a more compact form as
?2	3	5 ? ?x1?	?1?
?4 -2 -7? ?x2? = ?8? .	(2.36)
Note that x1 scales the first column, x2 the second one, and x3 the third one.
  Generally, a system of linear equations can be compactly represented in their matrix form as Ax = b; see (2.3), and the product Ax is a (linear) combination of the columns of A. We will discuss linear combinations in more detail in Section 2.5.

2.3 Solving Systems of Linear Equations
In (2.3), we introduced the general form of an equation system, i.e.,
a11x1 + · · · + a1nxn = b1

.
am1x1 + · · · + amnxn = bm ,

(2.37)

where aij  R and bi  R are known constants and xj are unknowns, i = 1, . . . , m, j = 1, . . . , n. Thus far, we saw that matrices can be used as a compact way of formulating systems of linear equations so that we can write Ax = b, see (2.10). Moreover, we defined basic matrix operations, such as addition and multiplication of matrices. In the following, we will focus on solving systems of linear equations and provide an algorithm for finding the inverse of a matrix.

2.3.1 Particular and General Solution
Before discussing how to generally solve systems of linear equations, let us have a look at an example. Consider the system of equations
(	l ?x1?	(	l

1  0  8	4
0  1  2	12

x2	=  42
3	8
x4

.	(2.38)

The system has two equations and four unknowns. Therefore, in general we would expect infinitely many solutions. This system of equations is in a particularly easy form, where the first two columns consist of a 1 and a 0. Remember that we want to find scalars x1, . . . , x4, such that

4
i=1

xici

= b, where we define ci

to be the ith column of the matrix and

b the right-hand-side of (2.38). A solution to the problem in (2.38) can be found immediately by taking 42 times the first column and 8 times the second column so that
b = (42l = 42 (1l + 8 (0l .	(2.39)

Therefore, a solution is [42, 8, 0, 0]?. This solution is called a particular	particular solution solution or special solution. However, this is not the only solution of this	special solution system of linear equations. To capture all the other solutions, we need
to be creative in generating 0 in a non-trivial way using the columns of the matrix: Adding 0 to our special solution does not change the special solution. To do so, we express the third column using the first two columns (which are of this very simple form)
(8l = 8 (1l + 2 (0l	(2.40)

so that 0 = 8c1 + 2c2 - 1c3 + 0c4 and (x1, x2, x3, x4) = (8, 2, -1, 0). In fact, any scaling of this solution by ?1 ? R produces the 0 vector, i.e.,

(1  0  8  -4



l ??

? 8 ??
?	?? = ? (8c




+ 2c


- c ) = 0 .	(2.41)

Following the same line of reasoning, we express the fourth column of the matrix in (2.38) using the first two columns and generate another set of non-trivial versions of 0 as

(	l ?

?-4??

1  0  8  -4

?? ?	?? = ? (-4c + 12c - c ) = 0	(2.42)

0  1  2	12

? 2 ? 0 ??	2	1	2	4





general solution

for any ?2	R. Putting everything together, we obtain all solutions of the equation system in (2.38), which is called the general solution, as the set

???

?42?
x ? R : x = ?	? + ?

? 8 ?
?	? + ?

?-4?
?	? , ? , ?

?  R???


.	(2.43)

??	? 0 ?

1	2	1	2
-1	??

Remark. The general approach we followed consisted of the following three steps:
1. Find a particular solution to Ax = b.
2. Find all solutions to Ax = 0.
3. Combine the solutions from steps 1. and 2. to the general solution.
Neither the general nor the particular solution is unique.	?
  The system of linear equations in the preceding example was easy to solve because the matrix in (2.38) has this particularly convenient form, which allowed us to find the particular and the general solution by in- spection. However, general equation systems are not of this simple form. Fortunately, there exists a constructive algorithmic way of transforming any system of linear equations into this particularly simple form: Gaussian elimination. Key to Gaussian elimination are elementary transformations of systems of linear equations, which transform the equation system into a simple form. Then, we can apply the three steps to the simple form that we just discussed in the context of the example in (2.38).




elementary
2.3.2 
Elementary Transformations
Key to solving a system of linear equations are elementary transformations

transformations	that keep the solution set the same, but that transform the equation system into a simpler form:

Exchange of two equations (rows in the matrix representing the system of equations)
Multiplication of an equation (row) with a constant ?	R	0
Addition of two equations (rows)

Example 2.6
For a ? R, we seek all solutions of the following system of equations:

-2x1
4x1 x1 x1

3
2 .	(2.44)
0
a

We start by converting this system of equations into the compact matrix notation Ax = b. We no longer mention the variables x explicitly and
build the augmented matrix (in the form [A | b])




augmented matrix

-2	4	-2	-1	4
4	-8	3	-3	1
-	-
1	-2	0	-3	4

-3 ? Swap with R3
0 ?? Swap with R1

where we used the vertical line to separate the left-hand side from the right-hand side in (2.44). We use ? to indicate a transformation of the augmented matrix using elementary transformations.
Swapping Rows 1 and 3 leads to




The augmented matrix A b compactly

1	-2	1	-1	1
4	-8	3	-3	1
? -	-	-

0
2	-4R1
-3 ? +2R1



represents the system of linear equations Ax = b.

When we now apply the indicated transformations (e.g., subtract Row 1
four times from Row 2), we obtain

1	-2	1	-1	1
0	0	-1	1	-3
-
0	0	-1	-2	3
??	1	-2	1	-1	1

0
2
3
a
0 ??



-R2 - R3





?	???

0	0	0	0	0
1	2	1	1	1
0	0	1	1	3
0	0	0	1	2
0	0	0	0	0

a +1
0
2
1
a +1



row-echelon form







particular solution






general solution













pivot



row-echelon form






pivot
  
In the following, we will detail a constructive way to obtain a particular and general solution of a system of linear equations.
Remark (Pivots and Staircase Structure). The leading coefficient of a row (first nonzero number from the left) is called the pivot and is always strictly to the right of the pivot of the row above it. Therefore, any equa- tion system in row-echelon form always has a "staircase" structure.   ?
Definition 2.6 (Row-Echelon Form). A matrix is in row-echelon form if
All rows that contain only zeros are at the bottom of the matrix; corre- spondingly, all rows that contain at least one nonzero element are on top of rows that contain only zeros.
Looking at nonzero rows only, the first nonzero number from the left (also called the pivot or the leading coefficient) is always strictly to the

leading coefficient	right of the pivot of the row above it.
In other texts, it is

sometimes required that the pivot is 1.

Remark (Basic and Free Variables). The variables corresponding to the pivots in the row-echelon form are called basic variables and the other

basic variable	variables are free variables. For example, in (2.45), x1, x3, x4 are basic
free variable	variables, whereas x2, x5 are free variables.	?
Remark (Obtaining a Particular Solution). The row-echelon form makes

our lives easier when we need to determine a particular solution. To do this, we express the right-hand side of the equation system using the pivot
columns, such that b =  P	? p , where p , i = 1, . . . , P , are the pivot
columns. The ?i are determined easiest if we start with the rightmost pivot column and work our way to the left.
In the previous example, we would try to find ?1, ?2, ?3 so that

?1?

?1?

?-1?	? 0 ?

? ? ? + ?


? ? + ?


?-1? = ?-2? .	(2.48)


From here, we find relatively directly that ?3 = 1, ?2 = 1, ?1 = 2. When we put everything together, we must not forget the non-pivot columns for which we set the coefficients implicitly to 0. Therefore, we get the particular solution x = [2, 0, -1, 1, 0]?.	?
Remark (Reduced Row Echelon Form). An equation system is in reduced  reduced

row-echelon form (also: row-reduced echelon form or row canonical form) if
It is in row-echelon form. Every pivot is 1.
The pivot is the only nonzero entry in its column.

row-echelon form

                                                    ?
  The reduced row-echelon form will play an important role later in Sec- tion 2.3.3 because it allows us to determine the general solution of a sys-
tem of linear equations in a straightforward way.	Gaussian

Remark (Gaussian Elimination). Gaussian elimination is an algorithm that performs elementary transformations to bring a system of linear equations into reduced row-echelon form.	?

elimination







2.3.3 The Minus-1 Trick
In the following, we introduce a practical trick for reading out the solu- tions x of a homogeneous system of linear equations Ax = 0, where A  Rk×n, x  Rn.
  To start, we assume that A is in reduced row-echelon form without any rows that just contain zeros, i.e.,
?? 0 · · ·  0  1 *  · · ·  *	0	*  · · ·  *	0	*.	· · · *. ??
.	.	0	0  · · ·  0  1  *  · · ·  *	.	.	.
?	?
A =	.	.	.	.	.	0	,
?	?
.	0	.	.

0  · · ·  0	0	0  · · ·  0	0	0  · · ·  0  1  *  · · ·  *


(2.51)

where can be an arbitrary real number, with the constraints that the first nonzero entry per row must be 1 and all other entries in the corresponding column must be 0. The columns j1, . . . , jk with the pivots (marked in bold) are the standard unit vectors e1, . . . , ek ? Rk. We extend this matrix to an n × n-matrix A˜ by adding n - k rows of the form
[0  · · ·  0  -1  0  · · ·  0]	(2.52)
so that the diagonal of the augmented matrix A˜ contains either 1 or -1.
Then, the columns of A˜ that contain the -1 as pivots are solutions of

the homogeneous equation system Ax = 0. To be more precise, these columns form a basis (Section 2.6.1) of the solution space of Ax = 0,
which we will later call the kernel or null space (see Section 2.7.3).	kernel
null space



Calculating the Inverse
To compute the inverse A-1 of A  Rn×n, we need to find a matrix X that satisfies AX = In. Then, X = A-1. We can write this down as a set of simultaneous linear equations AX = In, where we solve for X = [x1  xn]. We use the augmented matrix notation for a compact representation of this set of systems of linear equations and obtain
                [A|In]	? · · · ?	[In|A-1] .	(2.56)
This means that if we bring the augmented equation system into reduced row-echelon form, we can read out the inverse on the right-hand side of the equation system. Hence, determining the inverse of a matrix is equiv- alent to solving systems of linear equations.





0210



10201000110001001201001011110001

















2.3.4 Algorithms for Solving a System of Linear Equations
In the following, we briefly discuss approaches to solving a system of lin- ear equations of the form Ax = b. We make the assumption that a solu- tion exists. Should there be no solution, we need to resort to approximate solutions, which we do not cover in this chapter. One way to solve the ap- proximate problem is using the approach of linear regression, which we discuss in detail in Chapter 9.
  In special cases, we may be able to determine the inverse A-1, such that the solution of Ax = b is given as x = A-1b. However, this is only possible if A is a square matrix and invertible, which is often not the case. Otherwise, under mild assumptions (i.e., A needs to have linearly independent columns) we can use the transformation
Ax = b ?? A?Ax = A?b ?? x = (A?A)-1A?b	(2.59)

and use the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse (A?A)-1A? to determine the	Moore-Penrose

solution (2.59) that solves Ax = b, which also corresponds to the mini- mum norm least-squares solution. A disadvantage of this approach is that it requires many computations for the matrix-matrix product and comput- ing the inverse of A?A. Moreover, for reasons of numerical precision it is generally not recommended to compute the inverse or pseudo-inverse. In the following, we therefore briefly discuss alternative approaches to solving systems of linear equations.
  Gaussian elimination plays an important role when computing deter- minants (Section 4.1), checking whether a set of vectors is linearly inde- pendent (Section 2.5), computing the inverse of a matrix (Section 2.2.2), computing the rank of a matrix (Section 2.6.2), and determining a basis of a vector space (Section 2.6.1). Gaussian elimination is an intuitive and constructive way to solve a system of linear equations with thousands of variables. However, for systems with millions of variables, it is impracti- cal as the required number of arithmetic operations scales cubically in the number of simultaneous equations.
  In practice, systems of many linear equations are solved indirectly, by ei- ther stationary iterative methods, such as the Richardson method, the Ja- cobi method, the Gauß-Seidel method, and the successive over-relaxation method, or Krylov subspace methods, such as conjugate gradients, gener- alized minimal residual, or biconjugate gradients. We refer to the books by Stoer and Burlirsch (2002), Strang (2003), and Liesen and Mehrmann (2015) for further details.
  Let x* be a solution of Ax = b. The key idea of these iterative methods is to set up an iteration of the form
x(k+1) = Cx(k) + d	(2.60)
for suitable C and d that reduces the residual error ?x(k+1) - x*? in every iteration and converges to x*. We will introduce norms  , which allow us to compute similarities between vectors, in Section 3.1.

2.4 Vector Spaces
Thus far, we have looked at systems of linear equations and how to solve them (Section 2.3). We saw that systems of linear equations can be com- pactly represented using matrix-vector notation (2.10). In the following, we will have a closer look at vector spaces, i.e., a structured space in which vectors live.
  In the beginning of this chapter, we informally characterized vectors as objects that can be added together and multiplied by a scalar, and they remain objects of the same type. Now, we are ready to formalize this, and we will start by introducing the concept of a group, which is a set of elements and an operation defined on these elements that keeps some structure of the set intact.

pseudo-inverse









group
2.4.1 
Groups
Groups play an important role in computer science. Besides providing a fundamental framework for operations on sets, they are heavily used in cryptography, coding theory, and graphics.
Definition 2.7 (Group). Consider a set G and an operation ? : G ×G ? G
defined on G. Then G := (G, ?) is called a group if the following hold:

closure	1. Closure of G under ?: ?x, y ? G : x ? y ? G

neutral element inverse element







Abelian group
2. 
Associativity:  x, y, z	: (x	y)	z = x	(y	z)
3. Neutral element:  e	x	: x	e = x and e	x = x
4. Inverse element: x	y   : x  y = e and y  x = e, where e is the neutral element. We often write x-1 to denote the inverse element of x.
Remark. The inverse element is defined with respect to the operation ?
and does not necessarily mean 1 .	?
If additionally x, y	: x	y = y	x, then G = ( ,	) is an Abelian group (commutative).







N0 := N ? {0}



Definition 2.8 (General Linear Group). The set of regular (invertible) matrices A	Rn×n is a group with respect to matrix multiplication as
defined in (2.13) and is called general linear group GL(n, R). However,	general linear group
since matrix multiplication is not commutative, the group is not Abelian.

2.4.2 Vector Spaces
When we discussed groups, we looked at sets  and inner operations on
 , i.e., mappings	that only operate on elements in . In the following, we will consider sets that in addition to an inner operation + also contain an outer operation , the multiplication of a vector x  by a scalar ? R. We can think of the inner operation as a form of addition, and the outer operation as a form of scaling. Note that the inner/outer operations have nothing to do with inner/outer products.
Definition 2.9 (Vector Space). A real-valued vector space V = (V, +, ·) is  vector space
a set V with two operations




where

+ : V × V ? V	(2.62)
· : R × V ? V	(2.63)

1. ( , +) is an Abelian group
2. Distributivity:
1. ?? ? R, x, y ? V : ? · (x + y) = ? · x + ? · y
2. ??, ? ? R, x ? V : (? + ?) · x = ? · x + ? · x
3. Associativity (outer operation): ??, ? ? R, x ? V : ?·(? ·x) = (??)·x
4. Neutral element with respect to the outer operation: ?x ? V : 1·x = x
The elements x	V are called vectors. The neutral element of ( , +) is	vector
the zero vector 0 = [0, . . . , 0]?, and the inner operation + is called vector	vector addition
addition. The elements ? ? R are called scalars and the outer operation	scalar
· is a multiplication by scalars. Note that a scalar product is something	multiplication by

different, and we will get to this in Section 3.2.
Remark. A "vector multiplication" ab, a, b Rn, is not defined. Theoret- ically, we could define an element-wise multiplication, such that c = ab with cj = ajbj. This "array multiplication" is common to many program- ming languages but makes mathematically limited sense using the stan- dard rules for matrix multiplication: By treating vectors as n × 1 matrices

scalars




outer product

(which we usually do), we can use the matrix multiplication as defined in (2.13). However, then the dimensions of the vectors do not match. Only the following multiplications for vectors are defined: ab? ? Rn×n (outer product), a?b ? R (inner/scalar/dot product).	?















column vector






row vector transpose

Remark. In the following, we will denote a vector space (V, +, ·) by V when + and · are the standard vector addition and scalar multiplication. Moreover, we will use the notation x ? V for vectors in V to simplify notation.	?
Remark. The vector spaces Rn, Rn×1, R1×n are only different in the way we write vectors. In the following, we will not make a distinction between Rn and Rn×1, which allows us to write n-tuples as column vectors
?x1 ?
xn

This simplifies the notation regarding vector space operations. However, we do distinguish between Rn×1 and R1×n (the row vectors) to avoid con- fusion with matrix multiplication. By default, we write x to denote a col- umn vector, and a row vector is denoted by x?, the transpose of x.   ?

2.4.3 Vector Subspaces
In the following, we will introduce vector subspaces. Intuitively, they are sets contained in the original vector space with the property that when we perform vector space operations on elements within this subspace, we will never leave it. In this sense, they are "closed". Vector subspaces are a key idea in machine learning. For example, Chapter 10 demonstrates how to use vector subspaces for dimensionality reduction.
Definition 2.10 (Vector Subspace). Let V = ( , +, ) be a vector space
and	,  = . Then U = ( , +, ) is called vector subspace of V (or vector subspace linear subspace) if U is a vector space with the vector space operations + linear subspace and · restricted to U ×U and R×U. We write U ? V to denote a subspace

  If	and V is a vector space, then U naturally inherits many prop- erties directly from V because they hold for all x , and in particular for all x		. This includes the Abelian group properties, the distribu- tivity, the associativity and the neutral element. To determine whether (U , +, ·) is a subspace of V we still do need to show
1.	= , in particular: 0
2. Closure of U :
a. With respect to the outer operation: ?? ? R ?x ? U : ?x ? U.
b. With respect to the inner operation: ?x, y ? U : x + y ? U.















Figure 2.6 Not all subsets of R2 are subspaces. In A and C, the closure property is violated; B does not contain
0. Only D is a
subspace.

Remark. Every subspace U ? (Rn, +, ·) is the solution space of a homo- geneous system of linear equations Ax = 0 for x ? Rn.	?























linear combination


2.5 Linear Independence
In the following, we will have a close look at what we can do with vectors (elements of the vector space). In particular, we can add vectors together and multiply them with scalars. The closure property guarantees that we end up with another vector in the same vector space. It is possible to find a set of vectors with which we can represent every vector in the vector space by adding them together and scaling them. This set of vectors is a basis, and we will discuss them in Section 2.6.1. Before we get there, we will need to introduce the concepts of linear combinations and linear independence.
Definition 2.11 (Linear Combination). Consider a vector space V and a finite number of vectors x1, . . . , xk ? V . Then, every v ? V of the form
k
v = ?1x1 +	+ ?kxk =	?ixi	V	(2.65)
i=1
with ?1, . . . , ?k ? R is a linear combination of the vectors x1, . . . , xk.
  The 0-vector can always be written as the linear combination of k vec- tors x , . . . , x  because 0 =  k	0x is always true. In the following,

we are interested in non-trivial linear combinations of a set of vectors to represent 0, i.e., linear combinations of vectors x1, . . . , xk, where not all coefficients ?i in (2.65) are 0.
Definition 2.12 (Linear (In)dependence). Let us consider a vector space
V with k ? N and x1, . . . , xk ? V . If there is a non-trivial linear com-
		 

linearly dependent
linearly independent

x1, . . . , xk are linearly dependent. If only the trivial solution exists, i.e.,
?1 = . . . = ?k = 0 the vectors x1, . . . , xk are linearly independent.
  Linear independence is one of the most important concepts in linear algebra. Intuitively, a set of linearly independent vectors consists of vectors that have no redundancy, i.e., if we remove any of those vectors from the set, we will lose something. Throughout the next sections, we will formalize this intuition more.




















Figure 2.7 Geographic example (with crude approximations to cardinal directions) of linearly dependent vectors in a
two-dimensional space (plane).







Remark. The following properties are useful to find out whether vectors are linearly independent:
k vectors are either linearly dependent or linearly independent. There is no third option.
If at least one of the vectors x1, . . . , xk is 0 then they are linearly de- pendent. The same holds if two vectors are identical.
The vectors x1, . . . , xk : xi = 0, i = 1, . . . , k , k ? 2, are linearly dependent if and only if (at least) one of them is a linear combination of the others. In particular, if one vector is a multiple of another vector, i.e., xi = ?xj, ?	R then the set x1, . . . , xk : xi = 0, i = 1, . . . , k is linearly dependent.
A practical way of checking whether vectors x1, . . . , xk V are linearly independent is to use Gaussian elimination: Write all vectors as columns of a matrix A and perform Gaussian elimination until the matrix is in row echelon form (the reduced row-echelon form is unnecessary here):

- The pivot columns indicate the vectors, which are linearly indepen- dent of the vectors on the left. Note that there is an ordering of vec- tors when the matrix is built.
- The non-pivot columns can be expressed as linear combinations of the pivot columns on their left. For instance, the row-echelon form
1  3  0	(2.66)
0  0  2
tells us that the first and third columns are pivot columns. The sec- ond column is a non-pivot column because it is three times the first column.
All column vectors are linearly independent if and only if all columns are pivot columns. If there is at least one non-pivot column, the columns (and, therefore, the corresponding vectors) are linearly dependent.

?



Remark. Consider a vector space V with k linearly independent vectors
b1, . . . , bk and m linear combinations


k
x1 =	?i1bi ,
i=1

.




(2.70)

k
xm =	?imbi .
i=1
Defining B = [b1, . . . , bk] as the matrix whose columns are the linearly independent vectors b1, . . . , bk, we can write
??1j ?

xj = B?j ,	?j = ?
in a more compact form.

.
?kj

?? ,	j = 1, . . . , m,	(2.71)

We want to test whether x1, . . . , xm are linearly independent. For this
purpose, we follow the general approach of testing when  m  ? x = 0.
j  j
With (2.71), we obtain
m	m	m
L ?jxj = L ?jB?j = B L ?j?j .	(2.72)

This means that {x1, . . . , xm} are linearly independent if and only if the column vectors {?1, . . . , ?m} are linearly independent.
?
Remark. In a vector space V , m linear combinations of k vectors x1, . . . , xk
are linearly dependent if m > k.	?




x1
x2 x3=  b1
=  -4b1-  2b2	+  b3
-  2b2-  b4
+  4b4 .
-  3b4x4	=  17b1	-  10b2	+  11b3	+  b4
ectors x1, . . . , x4 ? Rn linearly independent?




2.6 Basis and Rank
In a vector space V , we are particularly interested in sets of vectors  that possess the property that any vector v V can be obtained by a linear combination of vectors in . These vectors are special vectors, and in the following, we will characterize them.









generating set span







minimal basis
2.6.1 
Generating Set and Basis
Definition 2.13 (Generating Set and Span). Consider a vector space V = ( , +, ) and set of vectors  = x1, . . . , xk	. If every vector v
  can be expressed as a linear combination of x1, . . . , xk,  is called a generating set of V . The set of all linear combinations of vectors in is called the span of . If  spans the vector space V , we write V = span[ ] or V = span[x1, . . . , xk].
  Generating sets are sets of vectors that span vector (sub)spaces, i.e., every vector can be represented as a linear combination of the vectors in the generating set. Now, we will be more specific and characterize the smallest generating set that spans a vector (sub)space.
Definition 2.14 (Basis). Consider a vector space V = ( , +, ) and
. A generating set	of V is called minimal if there exists no smaller set
˜ ?	that spans V . Every linearly independent generating set of V
is minimal and is called a basis of V .

Let V = (V, +, ·) be a vector space and B ? V, B = Ø. Then, the
following statements are equivalent:	A basis is a minimal generating set and a

is a basis of V .
is a minimal generating set.
  is a maximal linearly independent set of vectors in V , i.e., adding any other vector to this set will make it linearly dependent.
Every vector x	V is a linear combination of vectors from , and every linear combination is unique, i.e., with

maximal linearly independent set of vectors.


k	k
x = L ?ibi = L ?ibi	(2.77)

and ?i, ?i ? R, bi ? B it follows that ?i = ?i, i = 1, . . . , k.




canonical basis





















Remark. Every vector space V possesses a basis . The preceding exam- ples show that there can be many bases of a vector space V , i.e., there is no unique basis. However, all bases possess the same number of elements,
the basis vectors.	?	basis vector
  We only consider finite-dimensional vector spaces V . In this case, the dimension of V is the number of basis vectors of V , and we write dim(V ).	dimension If U ? V is a subspace of V , then dim(U ) ? dim(V ) and dim(U ) =




The dimension of a vector space corresponds to the


dim(V ) if and only if U = V . Intuitively, the dimension of a vector space can be thought of as the number of independent directions in this vector space.
Remark. The dimension of a vector space is not necessarily the number
(0l


one-dimensional, although the basis vector possesses two elements.	?
Remark. A basis of a subspace U = span[x1, . . . , xm]	Rn can be found by executing the following steps:
1. Write the spanning vectors as columns of a matrix A
2. Determine the row-echelon form of A.
3. The spanning vectors associated with the pivot columns are a basis of
U .
?





2.6.2 Rank
The number of linearly independent columns of a matrix A	Rm×n equals the number of linearly independent rows and is called the rank	rank of A and is denoted by rk(A).
Remark. The rank of a matrix has some important properties:
rk(A) = rk(A?), i.e., the column rank equals the row rank.
The columns of A Rm×n span a subspace U  Rm with dim(U ) = rk(A). Later we will call this subspace the image or range. A basis of U can be found by applying Gaussian elimination to A to identify the pivot columns.
The rows of A  Rm×n span a subspace W  Rn with dim(W ) = rk(A). A basis of W can be found by applying Gaussian elimination to A?.
For all A  Rn×n it holds that A is regular (invertible) if and only if
rk(A) = n.
For all A ? Rm×n and all b ? Rm it holds that the linear equation system Ax = b can be solved if and only if rk(A) = rk(A|b), where A|b denotes the augmented system.
For A ? Rm×n the subspace of solutions for Ax = 0 possesses dimen-
sion n - rk(A). Later, we will call this subspace the kernel or the null  kernel

space.

null space

A matrix A	Rm×n has full rank if its rank equals the largest possible	full rank
rank for a matrix of the same dimensions. This means that the rank of a full-rank matrix is the lesser of the number of rows and columns, i.e.,
rk(A) = min(m, n). A matrix is said to be rank deficient if it does not	rank deficient
have full rank.
?


























linear mapping vector space homomorphism
linear transformation









injective surjective bijective


2.7 Linear Mappings
In the following, we will study mappings on vector spaces that preserve their structure, which will allow us to define the concept of a coordinate. In the beginning of the chapter, we said that vectors are objects that can be added together and multiplied by a scalar, and the resulting object is still a vector. We wish to preserve this property when applying the mapping: Consider two real vector spaces V, W . A mapping F : V  W preserves the structure of the vector space if
F(x + y) = F(x) + F(y)	(2.85)
F(?x) = ?F(x)	(2.86)
for all x, y V and ? R. We can summarize this in the following definition:
Definition 2.15 (Linear Mapping). For vector spaces V, W , a mapping F : V  W is called a linear mapping (or vector space homomorphism/ linear transformation) if
  ?x, y ? V ??, ? ? R : F(?x + ?y) = ?F(x) + ?F(y) .	(2.87)
  It turns out that we can represent linear mappings as matrices (Sec- tion 2.7.1). Recall that we can also collect a set of vectors as columns of a matrix. When working with matrices, we have to keep in mind what the matrix represents: a linear mapping or a collection of vectors. We will see more about linear mappings in Chapter 4. Before we continue, we will briefly introduce special mappings.
Definition 2.16 (Injective, Surjective, Bijective). Consider a mapping F :
V ? W, where V, W can be arbitrary sets. Then F is called
Injective if	x, y	: F(x) = F(y) =	x = y.
Surjective if F( ) =	.
Bijective if it is injective and surjective.

  If F is surjective, then every element in	can be "reached" from using F. A bijective F can be "undone", i.e., there exists a mapping ? :
        so that ?	F(x) = x. This mapping ? is then called the inverse of F and normally denoted by F-1.
  With these definitions, we introduce the following special cases of linear mappings between vector spaces V and W :
isomorphism
Isomorphism: F : V ? W linear and bijective	endomorphism
Endomorphism: F : V ? V linear	automorphism
Automorphism: F : V ? V linear and bijective
We define idV : V ? V , x 1? x as the identity mapping or identity	identity mapping

automorphism in V .

identity automorphism



Theorem 2.17 (Theorem 3.59 in Axler (2015)). Finite-dimensional vector spaces V and W are isomorphic if and only if dim(V ) = dim(W ).
  Theorem 2.17 states that there exists a linear, bijective mapping be- tween two vector spaces of the same dimension. Intuitively, this means that vector spaces of the same dimension are kind of the same thing, as they can be transformed into each other without incurring any loss.
  Theorem 2.17 also gives us the justification to treat Rm×n (the vector space of m n-matrices) and Rmn (the vector space of vectors of length mn) the same, as their dimensions are mn, and there exists a linear, bi- jective mapping that transforms one into the other.
Remark. Consider vector spaces V, W, X. Then:
For linear mappings F : V	W and ? : W	X, the mapping
?	F : V	X is also linear.
If F : V	W is an isomorphism, then F-1 : W	V is an isomor- phism, too.


Figure 2.8 Two different coordinate systems defined by two sets of basis vectors. A vector x has different coordinate representations depending on which coordinate system is chosen.



If F : V	W, ? : V	W are linear, then F + ? and ?F, ?	R, are linear, too.

?

2.7.1 Matrix Representation of Linear Mappings
Any n-dimensional vector space is isomorphic to Rn (Theorem 2.17). We consider a basis b1, . . . , bn of an n-dimensional vector space V . In the following, the order of the basis vectors will be important. Therefore, we write




ordered basis












coordinate

B = (b1, . . . , bn)	(2.89)
and call this n-tuple an ordered basis of V .
Remark (Notation). We are at the point where notation gets a bit tricky. Therefore, we summarize some parts here. B = (b1, . . . , bn) is an ordered basis, B = {b1, . . . , bn} is an (unordered) basis, and B = [b1, . . . , bn] is a matrix whose columns are the vectors b1, . . . , bn.	?
Definition 2.18 (Coordinates). Consider a vector space V and an ordered basis B = (b1, . . . , bn) of V . For any x V we obtain a unique represen- tation (linear combination)
x = a1b1 + . . . + anbn	(2.90)
of x with respect to B. Then a1, . . . , an are the coordinates of x with respect to B, and the vector

?a1 ?

a = ?? . ?? ? R



(2.91)

coordinate vector coordinate representation

is the coordinate vector/coordinate representation of x with respect to the ordered basis B.

  A basis effectively defines a coordinate system. We are familiar with the Cartesian coordinate system in two dimensions, which is spanned by the canonical basis vectors e1, e2. In this coordinate system, a vector x R2 has a representation that tells us how to linearly combine e1 and e2 to obtain x. However, any basis of R2 defines a valid coordinate system, and the same vector x from before may have a different coordinate rep- resentation in the (b1, b2) basis. In Figure 2.8, the coordinates of x with respect to the standard basis (e1, e2) is [2, 2]?. However, with respect to the basis (b1, b2) the same vector x is represented as [1.09, 0.72]?, i.e., x = 1.09b1 + 0.72b2. In the following sections, we will discover how to obtain this representation.


Figure 2.9
Different coordinate representations of a vector x, depending on the choice of basis.


Remark. For an n-dimensional vector space V and an ordered basis B of V , the mapping F : Rn   V , F(ei) = bi, i = 1, . . . , n, is linear (and because of Theorem 2.17 an isomorphism), where (e1, . . . , en) is the standard basis of Rn.
?
  Now we are ready to make an explicit connection between matrices and linear mappings between finite-dimensional vector spaces.
Definition 2.19 (Transformation Matrix). Consider vector spaces V, W with corresponding (ordered) bases B = (b1, . . . , bn) and C = (c1, . . . , cm). Moreover, we consider a linear mapping F : V ? W . For j ? {1, . . . , n},
m
F(bj) = a1jc1 +	+ amjcm =	aijci	(2.92)
i=1
is the unique representation of F(bj) with respect to C. Then, we call the
m × n-matrix AF, whose elements are given by
AF(i, j) = aij ,	(2.93)
the transformation matrix of F (with respect to the ordered bases B of V	transformation

and C of W ).
  The coordinates of F(bj) with respect to the ordered basis C of W are the j-th column of AF. Consider (finite-dimensional) vector spaces V, W with ordered bases B, C and a linear mapping F : V ? W with

matrix

transformation matrix AF. If xˆ is the coordinate vector of x V with respect to B and yˆ the coordinate vector of y = F(x)  W with respect to C, then

yˆ = AFxˆ .	(2.94)
This means that the transformation matrix can be used to map coordinates with respect to an ordered basis in V to coordinates with respect to an ordered basis in W .





Figure 2.10 Three examples of linear transformations of the vectors shown as dots in (a);
(b) Rotation by 45?;
(c) Stretching of the
horizontal coordinates by 2;
(d) Combination of reflection, rotation and stretching.


Figure 2.10 gives three examples of linear transformations of a set of vec-tors. Figure 2.10(a) shows 400 vectors in R2, each of which is representedby a dot at the corresponding (x1, x2)-coordinates. The vectors are ar-ranged in a square. When we use matrix A1 in (2.97) to linearly transformeach of these vectors, we obtain the rotated square in Figure 2.10(b). If weapply the linear mapping represented by A2, we obtain the rectangle inFigure 2.10(c) where each x1-coordinate is stretched by 2. Figure 2.10(d)shows the original square from Figure 2.10(a) when linearly transformedusing A3, which is a combination of a reflection, a rotation, and a stretch.
2.7.2 Basis Change
In the following, we will have a closer look at how transformation matrices of a linear mapping F : V  W change if we change the bases in V and W . Consider two ordered bases

B = (b1, . . . , bn),
of V and two ordered bases
C = (c1, . . . , cm),

B˜ = (b˜1, . . . , b˜n)	(2.98)

C˜ = (c˜1, . . . , c˜m)	(2.99)

of W . Moreover, AF Rm×n is the transformation matrix of the linear mapping F : V  W with respect to the bases B and C, and A˜ F  Rm×n is the corresponding transformation mapping with respect to B˜ and C˜.
In the following, we will investigate how A and A˜ are related, i.e., how/
whether we can transform AF into A˜ F if we choose to perform a basis change from B, C to B˜, C˜.
Remark. We effectively get different coordinate representations of the identity mapping idV . In the context of Figure 2.9, this would mean to map coordinates with respect to (e1, e2) onto coordinates with respect to (b1, b2) without changing the vector x. By changing the basis and corre- spondingly the representation of vectors, the transformation matrix with respect to this new basis can have a particularly simple form that allows for straightforward computation.	?




  In the following, we will look at mappings that transform coordinate vectors with respect to one basis into coordinate vectors with respect to a different basis. We will state our main result first and then provide an explanation.
Theorem 2.20 (Basis Change). For a linear mapping F : V	W, ordered bases


of V and

B = (b1, . . . , bn),


C = (c1, . . . , cm),

B˜ = (b˜1, . . . , b˜n)	(2.103)

C˜ = (c˜1, . . . , c˜m)	(2.104)

of W, and a transformation matrix AF of F with respect to B and C, the corresponding transformation matrix A˜ F with respect to the bases B˜ and C˜ is given as
A˜ F = T -1AFS .	(2.105)
Here, S Rn×n is the transformation matrix of idV that maps coordinates with respect to B˜ onto coordinates with respect to B, and T  Rm×m is the transformation matrix of idW that maps coordinates with respect to C˜ onto coordinates with respect to C.
Proof Following Drumm and Weil (2001), we can write the vectors of the new basis B˜ of V as a linear combination of the basis vectors of B, such that
n
b˜j = s1jb1 +	+ snjbn =	sijbi ,	j = 1, . . . , n .	(2.106)
i=1
Similarly, we write the new basis vectors C˜ of W as a linear combination of the basis vectors of C, which yields
m
c˜k = t1kc1 + · · · + tmkcm =	tlkcl ,	k = 1, . . . , m.	(2.107)
l=1
We define S = ((sij)) ? Rn×n as the transformation matrix that maps
coordinates with respect to B˜ onto coordinates with respect to B and
T = ((tlk)) Rm×m as the transformation matrix that maps coordinates with respect to C˜ onto coordinates with respect to C. In particular, the jth column of S is the coordinate representation of b˜j with respect to B and

the kth column of T is the coordinate representation of c˜k with respect to
C. Note that both S and T are regular.
We are going to look at F(b˜j ) from two perspectives. First, applying the
mapping F, we get that for all j = 1, . . . , n

F(b˜j ) = L a˜kjc˜k


m
(2.107)
=

a˜kjL

tlkcl = L

 Lm

tlka˜kj !


cl , (2.108)

k=1 ..?..W,, ..

k=1

l=1

l=1

k=1

where we first expressed the new basis vectors c˜k W as linear com- binations of the basis vectors cl W and then swapped the order of summation.
Alternatively, when we express the b˜j ? V as linear combinations of
bj ? V , we arrive at


F(b˜j )


(2.106)
=	F


n


i=1

sijbi! =

Li=1


sijF(bi) =

Li=1


sij

Ll=1


alicl	(2.109a)



=
l=1

n


i=1

alisij !


cl ,	j = 1, . . . , n ,	(2.109b)

where we exploited the linearity of F. Comparing (2.108) and (2.109b), it follows for all j = 1, . . . , n and l = 1, . . . , m that

m	n
L tlka˜kj = L alisij	(2.110)


and, therefore,

k=1

i=1



such that

T A˜ F = AFS ? Rm×n ,	(2.111)

A˜ F = T -1AFS ,	(2.112)

which proves Theorem 2.20.

  Theorem 2.20 tells us that with a basis change in V (B is replaced with B˜) and W (C is replaced with C˜), the transformation matrix AF of a linear mapping F : V ? W is replaced by an equivalent matrix A˜ F with
A˜ F = T -1AFS.	(2.113)
Figure 2.11 illustrates this relation: Consider a homomorphism F : V
W and ordered bases B, B˜ of V and C, C˜ of W . The mapping FCB is an instantiation of F and maps basis vectors of B onto linear combinations of basis vectors of C. Assume that we know the transformation matrix AF of FCB with respect to the ordered bases B, C. When we perform a basis change from B to B˜ in V and from C to C˜ in W , we can determine the



Figure 2.11 For a homomorphism
F : V	W and ordered bases B, B˜


Vector spaces

F
V	W
FCB
B	AF	C

F
V	W
FCB
B	AF	C

of V and C, C˜ of W

Ordered bases

?BB˜ S	T

?CC˜

?BB˜

S	T -1 ? ˜

1
CC˜

(marked in blue), we can express the

A˜ F
B˜	C˜
F ˜ ˜

A˜ F
B˜	C˜
F ˜ ˜

mapping F

C˜B˜

with

CB	CB

respect to the bases B˜, C˜ equivalently as a composition of the
homomorphisms
FC˜B˜ =
?C˜C FCB ?BB˜
with respect to the

corresponding transformation matrix A˜ F as follows: First, we find the ma- trix representation of the linear mapping ?BB˜ : V V that maps coordi- nates with respect to the new basis B˜ onto the (unique) coordinates with
respect to the "old" basis B (in V ). Then, we use the transformation ma-
trix AF of FCB : V ? W to map these coordinates onto the coordinates

bases in the
subscripts. The

with respect to C in W . Finally, we use a linear mapping ?


C˜C

: W ? W

corresponding transformation matrices are in red.

to map the coordinates with respect to C onto coordinates with respect to C˜. Therefore, we can express the linear mapping FC˜B˜ as a composition of linear mappings that involve the "old" basis:

F ˜ ˜ = ? ˜
? 
FCB ? ?

˜ = ?-1
? 
FCB ? ?

˜ .	(2.114)

Concretely, we use ?BB˜ = idV and ?CC˜ = idW , i.e., the identity mappings that map vectors onto themselves, but with respect to a different basis.


equivalent

Definition 2.21 (Equivalence). Two matrices A, A˜ ? Rm×n are equivalent

if there exist regular matrices S ? Rn×n and T ? Rm×m, such that
A˜ = T -1AS.


similar

Definition 2.22 (Similarity). Two matrices A, A˜ ? Rn×n are similar if

there exists a regular matrix S ? Rn×n with A˜ = S-1AS
Remark. Similar matrices are always equivalent. However, equivalent ma- trices are not necessarily similar.	?
Remark. Consider vector spaces V, W, X. From the remark that follows Theorem 2.17, we already know that for linear mappings F : V  W and ? : W X the mapping ? F : V X is also linear. With transformation matrices AF and A? of the corresponding mappings, the overall transformation matrix is A??F = A?AF.	?
  In light of this remark, we can look at basis changes from the perspec- tive of composing linear mappings:
AF is the transformation matrix of a linear mapping FCB : V	W
with respect to the bases B, C.
A˜ F is the transformation matrix of the linear mapping FC˜B˜ : V	W
with respect to the bases B˜, C˜.
S is the transformation matrix of a linear mapping ?BB˜ : V ? V
(automorphism) that represents B˜ in terms of B. Normally, ? = idV is the identity mapping in V .

T is the transformation matrix of a linear mapping ?CC˜ : W ? W
(automorphism) that represents C˜ in terms of C. Normally, ? = idW is the identity mapping in W .
If we (informally) write down the transformations just in terms of bases,

then AF : B ? C, A˜ F : B˜
T -1 : C ? C˜, and

? C˜, S : B˜

? B, T : C˜

? C and

B˜ ? C˜ = B˜ ? B? C ? C˜

(2.115)

A˜ F = T -1AFS .	(2.116)
Note that the execution order in (2.116) is from right to left because vec-



  In Chapter 4, we will be able to exploit the concept of a basis change to find a basis with respect to which the transformation matrix of an en- domorphism has a particularly simple (diagonal) form. In Chapter 10, we will look at a data compression problem and find a convenient basis onto which we can project the data while minimizing the compression loss.










kernel null space

image range

domain codomain
2.7.3 
Image and Kernel
The image and kernel of a linear mapping are vector subspaces with cer- tain important properties. In the following, we will characterize them more carefully.
Definition 2.23 (Image and Kernel).
For F : V ? W , we define the kernel/null space
ker(F) := F-1(0W ) = {v ? V : F(v) = 0W }	(2.122)
and the image/range
Im(F) := F(V ) = {w ? W |?v ? V : F(v) = w} .	(2.123)
We also call V and W also the domain and codomain of F, respectively.
  Intuitively, the kernel is the set of vectors v V that F maps onto the neutral element 0W  W . The image is the set of vectors w  W that can be "reached" by F from any vector in V . An illustration is given in Figure 2.12.
Remark. Consider a linear mapping F : V  W , where V, W are vector spaces.
It always holds that F(0V ) = 0W and, therefore, 0V	ker(F). In particular, the null space is never empty.
Im(F) ? W is a subspace of W , and ker(F) ? V is a subspace of V .



V	F : V ? W

Figure 2.12 Kernel
W	and image of a
linear mapping
F : V ? W .











F is injective (one-to-one) if and only if ker(F) = {0}.
?
Remark (Null Space and Column Space). Let us consider A ? Rm×n and a linear mapping F : Rn ? Rm, x 1? Ax.
For A = [a1, . . . , an], where ai are the columns of A, we obtain

Im(F) = {Ax : x ? Rn} =

n


i=1

xiai : x1, . . . , xn ? R)


(2.124a)

= span[a1, . . . , an] ? Rm ,	(2.124b)
i.e., the image is the span of the columns of A, also called the column	column space
space. Therefore, the column space (image) is a subspace of Rm, where
m is the "height" of the matrix.
rk(A) = dim(Im(F)).
The kernel/null space ker(F) is the general solution to the homoge- neous system of linear equations Ax = 0 and captures all possible linear combinations of the elements in Rn that produce 0 Rm.
The kernel is a subspace of Rn, where n is the "width" of the matrix. The kernel focuses on the relationship among the columns, and we can use it to determine whether/how we can express a column as a linear combination of other columns.
?
































rank-nullity
theorem	Theorem 2.24 (Rank-Nullity Theorem). For vector spaces V, W and a lin- ear mapping F : V ? W it holds that
dim(ker(F)) + dim(Im(F)) = dim(V ) .	(2.129)


fundamental theorem of linear mappings
  
The rank-nullity theorem is also referred to as the fundamental theorem of linear mappings (Axler, 2015, theorem 3.22). The following are direct consequences of Theorem 2.24:
If dim(Im(F)) < dim(V ), then ker(F) is non-trivial, i.e., the kernel contains more than 0V and dim(ker(F)) ? 1.
If AF is the transformation matrix of F with respect to an ordered basis and dim(Im(F)) < dim(V ), then the system of linear equations AFx = 0 has infinitely many solutions.
If dim(V ) = dim(W ), then the following three-way equivalence holds:
- F is injective
- F is surjective
- F is bijective since Im(F) ? W .

2.8 Affine Spaces	61
2.8 Affine Spaces
In the following, we will have a closer look at spaces that are offset from the origin, i.e., spaces that are no longer vector subspaces. Moreover, we will briefly discuss properties of mappings between these affine spaces, which resemble linear mappings.
Remark. In the machine learning literature, the distinction between linear and affine is sometimes not clear so that we can find references to affine spaces/mappings as linear spaces/mappings.	?

2.8.1 Affine Subspaces
Definition 2.25 (Affine Subspace). Let V be a vector space, x0 ? V and
U ? V a subspace. Then the subset
L = x0 + U := {x0 + u : u ? U }	(2.130a)
= {v ? V |?u ? U : v = x0 + u} ? V	(2.130b)
is called affine subspace or linear manifold of V . U is called direction or	affine subspace

direction space, and x0 is called support point. In Chapter 12, we refer to such a subspace as a hyperplane.
Note that the definition of an affine subspace excludes 0 if x0 ?/ U .

linear manifold direction direction space
support point

Therefore, an affine subspace is not a (linear) subspace (vector subspace) of V for x0 / U .
  Examples of affine subspaces are points, lines, and planes in R3, which do not (necessarily) go through the origin.
Remark. Consider two affine subspaces L = x0 + U and L˜ = x˜0 + U˜ of a vector space V . Then, L  L˜ if and only if U  U˜ and x0  x˜0  U˜.
  Affine subspaces are often described by parameters: Consider a k-dimen- sional affine space L = x0 + U of V . If (b1, . . . , bk) is an ordered basis of U , then every element x ? L can be uniquely described as
x = x0 + ?1b1 + . . . + ?kbk ,	(2.131)

hyperplane

where ?1, . . . , ?k ? R. This representation is called parametric equation	parametric equation
of L with directional vectors b1, . . . , bk and parameters ?1, . . . , ?k.	?	parameters




line


plane




hyperplane








Figure 2.13 Lines are affine subspaces. Vectors y on a line x0 + ?b1 lie in an affine subspace L with support point x0 and direction b1.



Remark (Inhomogeneous systems of linear equations and affine subspaces). For A	Rm×n and x	Rm, the solution of the system of linear equa- tions A? = x is either the empty set or an affine subspace of Rn of dimension n	rk(A). In particular, the solution of the linear equation ?1b1 + . . . + ?nbn = x, where (?1, . . . , ?n) = (0, . . . , 0), is a hyperplane in Rn.
  In Rn, every k-dimensional affine subspace is the solution of an inho- mogeneous system of linear equations Ax = b, where A	Rm×n, b Rm and rk(A) = n	k. Recall that for homogeneous equation systems Ax = 0 the solution was a vector subspace, which we can also think of as a special affine space with support point x0 = 0.		?

2.8.2 Affine Mappings
Similar to linear mappings between vector spaces, which we discussed in Section 2.7, we can define affine mappings between two affine spaces. Linear and affine mappings are closely related. Therefore, many properties that we already know from linear mappings, e.g., that the composition of linear mappings is a linear mapping, also hold for affine mappings.
Definition 2.26 (Affine Mapping). For two vector spaces V, W , a linear

2.9 Further Reading	63
mapping F : V ? W , and a ? W , the mapping
? : V ? W	(2.132)
x 1? a + F(x)	(2.133)
is an affine mapping from V to W . The vector a is called the translation	affine mapping

vector of ?.
Every affine mapping ? : V  W is also the composition of a linear mapping F : V   W and a translation t : W  W in W , such that ? = t  F. The mappings F and t are uniquely determined.
The composition ?' ? of affine mappings ? : V  W , ?' : W  X is affine.
Affine mappings keep the geometric structure invariant. They also pre- serve the dimension and parallelism.

2.9 Further Reading
There are many resources for learning linear algebra, including the text- books by Strang (2003), Golan (2007), Axler (2015), and Liesen and Mehrmann (2015). There are also several online resources that we men- tioned in the introduction to this chapter. We only covered Gaussian elim- ination here, but there are many other approaches for solving systems of linear equations, and we refer to numerical linear algebra textbooks by Stoer and Burlirsch (2002), Golub and Van Loan (2012), and Horn and Johnson (2013) for an in-depth discussion.
  In this book, we distinguish between the topics of linear algebra (e.g., vectors, matrices, linear independence, basis) and topics related to the geometry of a vector space. In Chapter 3, we will introduce the inner product, which induces a norm. These concepts allow us to define angles, lengths and distances, which we will use for orthogonal projections. Pro- jections turn out to be key in many machine learning algorithms, such as linear regression and principal component analysis, both of which we will cover in Chapters 9 and 10, respectively.

translation vector

Exercises
2.1 We consider (R\{-1}, ?), where
a ? b := ab + a + b,	a, b ? R\{-1}	(2.134)
a. Show that (R\{-1}, ?) is an Abelian group.
b. Solve
3 ? x ? x = 15
in the Abelian group (R\{-1}, ?), where ? is defined in (2.134).
2.2 Let n be in N 0 . Let k, x be in Z. We define the congruence class k¯ of the integer k as the set
k = {x ? Z | x - k = 0 (modn)}
= {x ? Z | ?a ? Z: (x - k = n · a)} .
We now define Z/nZ (sometimes written Zn) as the set of all congruence classes modulo n. Euclidean division implies that this set is a finite set con- taining n elements:
Zn = {0, 1, . . . , n - 1}
For all a, b ? Zn, we define

a ? b := a + b
a. Show that (Zn, ?) is a group. Is it Abelian?
b. We now define another operation ? for all a and b in Zn as
                      a ? b = a × b ,	(2.135) where a × b represents the usual multiplication in Z.
Let n = 5. Draw the times table of the elements of Z5\{0} under ?, i.e., calculate the products a ? b for all a and b in Z5\{0}.
Hence, show that Z5\{0} is closed under ? and possesses a neutral element for ?. Display the inverse of all elements in Z5\{0} under ?. Conclude that (Z5\{0}, ?) is an Abelian group.
c. Show that (Z8\{0}, ?) is not a group.
d. We recall that the B´ezout theorem states that two integers a and b are relatively prime (i.e., gcd(a, b) = 1) if and only if there exist two integers u and v such that au + bv = 1. Show that (Zn\{0}, ?) is a group if and only if n ? N\{0} is prime.
2.3 Consider the set G of 3 × 3 matrices defined as follows:
???1 x	z?	1	??
G =	?0	1	y? ? R3×3 1 x, y, z ? R
? 0	0	1	1	?
We define as the standard matrix multiplication.
Is ( , ) a group? If yes, is it Abelian? Justify your answer.
2.4 Compute the following matrix products, if possible:


a.
1  2	1  1  0
?4  5? ?0  1  1?
7  8	1  0  1

b.
1  2  3	1  1  0


7  8  9
c.

1  0  1

1  1  0	1  2  3


1  0  1

d.

(

7  8  9


l ?0	3 ?

1  2	1	2
4  1  -1  -4

e.

1  -1
2	1
5	2

?0	3 ? (
5	2


1  2	1	2
4  1  -1  -4

2.5 Find the set	of all solutions in x of the following inhomogeneous linear systems Ax = b, where A and b are defined as follows:
a.

?1	1	-1  -1?

? 1 ?



2  -1	1	3
5	2	-4	2
b.
? 1	-1  0	0	1 ?

? 4 ?


? 3 ?


2	-1  0	1	-1	5
-1	2	0  -2  -1	-1
2.6 Using Gaussian elimination, find all solutions of the inhomogeneous equa- tion system Ax = b with
?0  1  0  0  1  0?	? 2 ?
A = ?0  0  0  1  1  0? ,	b = ?-1? .


2.7 Find all solutions in x =

where

?x1?
x3


? R3 of the equation system Ax = 12x,

?6  4  3?

and  3



xi = 1.

A =  6  0  9
0  8  0

2.8 Determine the inverses of the following matrices if possible:
a.
?2  3  4?
4  5  6
b.
1  0  1  0
A =  1  1  0  1
1  1  1  0
2.9 Which of the following sets are subspaces of R3?
a. A =  (?, ? + µ3, ?	µ3) ?, µ	R
b. B =  (?2,  ?2, 0)  ?	R
c. Let ? be in R.
C = {(?1, ?2, ?3) ? R3 | ?1 - 2?2 + 3?3 = ?}
d. D = {(?1, ?2, ?3) ? R3 | ?2 ? Z}
2.10 Are the following sets of vectors linearly independent?
a.

? 2 ?	? 1 ?

? 3 ?



3
b.
?1?
? ?

-2

?1?
? ?

8

?1?
? ?



2.11 Write



as linear combination of

?0?



?1?


? 1 ?
5

?1?



?1?	?1?	? 2 ?
x1 = ?1? ,	x2 = ?2? ,	x3 = ?-1?


2.12 Consider two subspaces of R4:

? 1 ? ? 2 ?

?-1?

?-1?

? 2 ? ?-3?



-3	0
-1

?-1?



? 2 ?



0	-2
-1

Determine a basis of U1 n U2.
2.13 Consider two subspaces U1 and U2, where U1 is the solution space of the homogeneous equation system A1x = 0 and U2 is the solution space of the homogeneous equation system A2x = 0 with
?1	0	1 ?	?3  -3  0?


2	1	3
1	0	1
a. Determine the dimension of U1, U2.
b. Determine bases of U1 and U2.
c. Determine a basis of U1 n U2.

7  -5  2
3  -1  2

2.14 Consider two subspaces U1 and U2, where U1 is spanned by the columns of
A1 and U2 is spanned by the columns of A2 with
?1	0	1 ?	?3  -3  0?


2	1	3
1	0	1
a. Determine the dimension of U1, U2
b. Determine bases of U1 and U2
c. Determine a basis of U1 n U2

7  -5  2
3  -1  2

2.15 Let F = {(x, y, z) ? R3 | x+y-z = 0} and G = {(a-b, a+b, a-3b) | a, b ? R}.
a. Show that F and G are subspaces of R3.
b. Calculate F n G without resorting to any basis vector.
c. Find one basis for F and one for G, calculate F G using the basis vectors previously found and check your result with the previous question.
2.16 Are the following mappings linear?
a. Let a, b ? R.

F : L1([a, b]) ? R
f 1? F(f) =



b
f(x)dx ,
a

where L1([a, b]) denotes the set of integrable functions on [a, b].
b. 
F : C1 ? C0
f 1? F(f) = f' ,
where for k ? 1, Ck denotes the set of k times continuously differen- tiable functions, and C0 denotes the set of continuous functions.



c. 



d. 




e. Let ? be in [0, 2p[ and


F : R ? R
x 1? F(x) = cos(x)

F : R3 ? R2
x 1? (1  2  3l x

F : R2 ? R2
x	cos(?)	sin(?) x
- sin(?)  cos(?)

2.17 Consider the linear mapping
F : R3 ? R4
??x1??


?3x1 + 2x2 + x3?

x1 + x2 + x3
F	x2	=

Find the transformation matrix AF. Determine rk(AF).
Compute the kernel and image of F. What are dim(ker(F)) and dim(Im(F))?
2.18 Let E be a vector space. Let f and g be two automorphisms on E such that f ? g = idE (i.e., f ? g is the identity mapping idE ). Show that ker(f) = ker(g  f), Im(g) = Im(g  f) and that ker(f)  Im(g) = 0E .
2.19 Consider an endomorphism F : R3  R3 whose transformation matrix
(with respect to the standard basis in R3) is
?1	1	0?
1	1	1
a. Determine ker(F) and Im(F).
b. Determine the transformation matrix A˜ F with respect to the basis
?1? ?1? ?1?
B = (?1? , ?2? , ?0?) ,
i.e., perform a basis change toward the new basis B.
2.20 Let us consider b1, b2, b'1, b'2, 4 vectors of R2 expressed in the standard basis of R2 as
b1 = (2l ,	b2 = (-1l ,	b' = ( 2 l ,	b' = (1l

and let us define two ordered bases B = (b1, b2) and B' = (b'1, b'2) of R2.


a. Show that B and B' are two bases of R2 and draw those basis vectors.
b. Compute the matrix P 1 that performs a basis change from B' to B.
c. We consider c1, c2, c3, three vectors of R3 defined in the standard basis of R3 as
? 1 ?	? 0 ?	? 1 ?

-1	2	-1
and we define C = (c1, c2, c3).
(i) Show that C is a basis of R3, e.g., by using determinants (see Section 4.1).
(ii) Let us call C' = (c'1, c'2, c'3) the standard basis of R3. Determine the matrix P 2 that performs the basis change from C to C'.
d. We consider a homomorphism F : R2 -? R3, such that
F(b1 + b2)  =  c2 + c3
F(b1 - b2)  =  2c1 - c2 + 3c3
where B = (b1, b2) and C = (c1, c2, c3) are ordered bases of R2 and R3, respectively.
Determine the transformation matrix AF of F with respect to the or- dered bases B and C.
e. Determine A', the transformation matrix of F with respect to the bases
B' and C'.
f. Let us consider the vector x ? R2 whose coordinates in B' are [2, 3]?. In other words, x = 2b'1 + 3b'2.
(i) Calculate the coordinates of x in B.
(ii) Based on that, compute the coordinates of F(x) expressed in C.
(iii) Then, write F(x) in terms of c'1, c'2, c'3.
(iv) Use the representation of x in B' and the matrix A' to find this
result directly.




3


Analytic Geometry




In Chapter 2, we studied vectors, vector spaces, and linear mappings at a general but abstract level. In this chapter, we will add some geomet- ric interpretation and intuition to all of these concepts. In particular, we will look at geometric vectors and compute their lengths and distances or angles between two vectors. To be able to do this, we equip the vec- tor space with an inner product that induces the geometry of the vector space. Inner products and their corresponding norms and metrics capture the intuitive notions of similarity and distances, which we use to develop the support vector machine in Chapter 12. We will then use the concepts of lengths and angles between vectors to discuss orthogonal projections, which will play a central role when we discuss principal component anal- ysis in Chapter 10 and regression via maximum likelihood estimation in Chapter 9. Figure 3.1 gives an overview of how concepts in this chapter are related and how they are connected to other chapters of the book.


Figure 3.1 A mind map of the concepts introduced in this chapter, along with when they are used in other parts of the book.














70
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.

3.1 Norms	71





Figure 3.3 For different norms, the red lines indicate the set of vectors with norm 1. Left: Manhattan norm; Right: Euclidean distance.



3.1 Norms
When we think of geometric vectors, i.e., directed line segments that start at the origin, then intuitively the length of a vector is the distance of the "end" of this directed line segment from the origin. In the following, we will discuss the notion of the length of vectors using the concept of a norm.
Definition 3.1 (Norm). A norm on a vector space V is a function	norm
? · ? : V ? R ,	(3.1)
x 1? ?x? ,	(3.2)
which assigns each vector x its length ?x? ? R, such that for all ? ? R	length
and x, y ? V the following hold:

Absolutely homogeneous: ??x? = |?|?x?
Triangle inequality: ?x + y? ? ?x? + ?y?
Positive definite: ?x? ? 0 and ?x? = 0 ?? x = 0
  In geometric terms, the triangle inequality states that for any triangle, the sum of the lengths of any two sides must be greater than or equal to the length of the remaining side; see Figure 3.2 for an illustration. Definition 3.1 is in terms of a general vector space V (Section 2.4), but in this book we will only consider a finite-dimensional vector space Rn. Recall that for a vector x Rn we denote the elements of the vector using a subscript, that is, xi is the ith element of the vector x.

absolutely homogeneous
triangle inequality positive definite
Figure 3.2 Triangle inequality.

c = a + b



Manhattan norm




l1 norm



Euclidean norm




Euclidean distance

l2 norm

Remark. Throughout this book, we will use the Euclidean norm (3.4) by default if not stated otherwise.	?

3.2 Inner Products
Inner products allow for the introduction of intuitive geometrical con- cepts, such as the length of a vector and the angle or distance between two vectors. A major purpose of inner products is to determine whether vectors are orthogonal to each other.





scalar product dot product











bilinear mapping
3.2.1 
Dot Product
We may already be familiar with a particular type of inner product, the
scalar product/dot product in Rn, which is given by
n
x?y =	xiyi .	(3.5)
i=1
We will refer to this particular inner product as the dot product in this book. However, inner products are more general concepts with specific properties, which we will now introduce.

3.2.2 General Inner Products
Recall the linear mapping from Section 2.7, where we can rearrange the mapping with respect to addition and multiplication with a scalar. A bi- linear mapping ? is a mapping with two arguments, and it is linear in each argument, i.e., when we look at a vector space V then it holds that for all x, y, z ? V, ?, ? ? R that
?(?x + ?y, z) = ??(x, z) + ??(y, z)	(3.6)
?(x, ?y + ?z) = ??(x, y) + ??(x, z) .	(3.7)
Here, (3.6) asserts that ? is linear in the first argument, and (3.7) asserts that ? is linear in the second argument (see also (2.87)).

3.2 Inner Products	73
Definition 3.2. Let V be a vector space and ? : V	V	R be a bilinear mapping that takes two vectors and maps them onto a real number. Then
? is called symmetric if ?(x, y) = ?(y, x) for all x, y	V , i.e., the	symmetric
order of the arguments does not matter.
? is called positive definite if	positive definite
?x ? V \{0} : ?(x, x) > 0 ,	?(0, 0) = 0 .	(3.8)
Definition 3.3. Let V be a vector space and ? : V	V	R be a bilinear mapping that takes two vectors and maps them onto a real number. Then
A positive definite, symmetric bilinear mapping ? : V ×V ? R is called
an inner product on V . We typically write ?x, y? instead of ?(x, y).	inner product
The pair (V, ?·, ·?) is called an inner product space or (real) vector space	inner product space

with inner product. If we use the dot product defined in (3.5), we call
(V, ?·, ·?) a Euclidean vector space.
We will refer to these spaces as inner product spaces in this book.

vector space with inner product
Euclidean vector space




3.2.3 Symmetric, Positive Definite Matrices
Symmetric, positive definite matrices play an important role in machine learning, and they are defined via the inner product. In Section 4.3, we will return to symmetric, positive definite matrices in the context of matrix decompositions. The idea of symmetric positive semidefinite matrices is key in the definition of kernels (Section 12.4).
  Consider an n-dimensional vector space V with an inner product ?·, ·? : V × V ? R (see Definition 3.3) and an ordered basis B = (b1, . . . , bn) of V . Recall from Section 2.6.1 that any vectors x, y ? V can be written as
	 

inner product, it holds for all x, y ? V that
?x, y? = *L	L	= L L ?i ?bi, bj? ?j = xˆ?Ayˆ , (3.10)
?ibi,	?jbj+
n


i=1

j=1

i=1 j=1

where Aij := bi, bj and xˆ, yˆ are the coordinates of x and y with respect to the basis B. This implies that the inner product , is uniquely deter- mined through A. The symmetry of the inner product also means that A

is symmetric. Furthermore, the positive definiteness of the inner product implies that






symmetric, positive

?x ? V \{0} : x?Ax > 0 .	(3.11)
Definition 3.4 (Symmetric, Positive Definite Matrix). A symmetric matrix
A ? Rn×n that satisfies (3.11) is called symmetric, positive definite, or

definite	just positive definite. If only ? holds in (3.11), then A is called symmetric,

positive definite
symmetric, positive semidefinite

positive semidefinite.


















If A ? Rn×n is symmetric, positive definite, then
?x, y? = xˆ?Ayˆ



(3.14)


defines an inner product with respect to an ordered basis B, where xˆ and
yˆ are the coordinate representations of x, y ? V with respect to B.
Theorem 3.5. For a real-valued, finite-dimensional vector space V and an ordered basis B of V , it holds that ?·, ·? : V × V ? R is an inner product if and only if there exists a symmetric, positive definite matrix A ? Rn×n with
                  ?x, y? = xˆ?Ayˆ .	(3.15)
  The following properties hold if A	Rn×n is symmetric and positive definite:

The null space (kernel) of A consists only of 0 because x?Ax > 0 for all x ?= 0. This implies that Ax ?= 0 if x ?= 0.
The diagonal elements aii of A are positive because aii = ei?Aei > 0, where ei is the ith vector of the standard basis in Rn.

3.3 Lengths and Distances	75
3.3 Lengths and Distances
In Section 3.1, we already discussed norms that we can use to compute the length of a vector. Inner products and norms are closely related in the
sense that any inner product induces a norm	Inner products induce norms.
?x? :=	?x, x?	(3.16)
in a natural way, such that we can compute lengths of vectors using the in- ner product. However, not every norm is induced by an inner product. The Manhattan norm (3.3) is an example of a norm without a corresponding inner product. In the following, we will focus on norms that are induced by inner products and introduce geometric concepts, such as lengths, dis- tances, and angles.
Remark (Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality). For an inner product vector space
(V, , ) the induced norm   satisfies the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality   Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality
| ?x, y? | ? ?x??y? .	(3.17)
?


Definition 3.6 (Distance and Metric). Consider an inner product space
(V, ?·, ·?). Then

d(x, y) := ?x - y? =	?x - y, x - y?	(3.21)
is called the distance between x and y for x, y	V . If we use the dot	distance
product as the inner product, then the distance is called Euclidean distance.	Euclidean distance







metric

The mapping



is called a metric.


d : V × V ? R	(3.22)
(x, y) 1? d(x, y)	(3.23)








positive definite symmetric

Remark. Similar to the length of a vector, the distance between vectors does not require an inner product: a norm is sufficient. If we have a norm induced by an inner product, the distance may vary depending on the choice of the inner product.	?
A metric d satisfies the following:
1. d is positive definite, i.e., d(x, y) ? 0 for all x, y ? V and d(x, y) =
0 ?? x = y .
2. d is symmetric, i.e., d(x, y) = d(y, x) for all x, y ? V .

triangle inequality	3. Triangle inequality: d(x, z) ? d(x, y) + d(y, z) for all x, y, z ? V .
Remark. At first glance, the lists of properties of inner products and met- rics look very similar. However, by comparing Definition 3.3 with Defini- tion 3.6 we observe that x, y and d(x, y) behave in opposite directions. Very similar x and y will result in a large value for the inner product and a small value for the metric.	?




Figure 3.4 When restricted to [0, p] then f (?) = cos(?) returns a unique number in the interval [-1, 1].
1



0
3.4 
Angles and Orthogonality
In addition to enabling the definition of lengths of vectors, as well as the distance between two vectors, inner products also capture the geometry of a vector space by defining the angle ? between two vectors. We use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality (3.17) to define angles ? in inner prod- uct spaces between two vectors x, y, and this notion coincides with our intuition in R2 and R3. Assume that x ?= 0, y ?= 0. Then
1 ?  ?x, y?  ? 1 .	(3.24)
?x? ?y?

-1 0


p/2
?

p
Therefore, there exists a unique ? ? [0, p], illustrated in Figure 3.4, with



cos ? =  ?x, y?
?x? ?y?

.	(3.25)


angle

The number ? is the angle between the vectors x and y. Intuitively, the angle between two vectors tells us how similar their orientations are. For example, using the dot product, the angle between x and y = 4x, i.e., y is a scaled version of x, is 0: Their orientation is the same.

3.4 Angles and Orthogonality	77
Figure 3.5 The angle ? between two vectors x, y is computed using the inner product.






1

  A key feature of the inner product is that it also allows us to characterize vectors that are orthogonal.
0	1
Definition 3.7 (Orthogonality). Two vectors x and y are orthogonal if and	orthogonal
only if x, y = 0, and we write x	y. If additionally  x  = 1 =  y ,
i.e., the vectors are unit vectors, then x and y are orthonormal.	orthonormal
  An implication of this definition is that the 0-vector is orthogonal to every vector in the vector space.
Remark. Orthogonality is the generalization of the concept of perpendic- ularity to bilinear forms that do not have to be the dot product. In our context, geometrically, we can think of orthogonal vectors as having a right angle with respect to a specific inner product.	?






Figure 3.6 The angle ? between two vectors x, y can change depending on the inner product.







orthogonal matrix

Definition 3.8 (Orthogonal Matrix). A square matrix A	Rn×n is an
orthogonal matrix if and only if its columns are orthonormal so that
AA? = I = A?A ,	(3.29)

which implies that
A-1 = A? ,	(3.30)


It is convention to call these matrices "orthogonal" but a more precise description would be "orthonormal". Transformations with orthogonal matrices preserve distances and angles.

i.e., the inverse is obtained by simply transposing the matrix.
  Transformations by orthogonal matrices are special because the length of a vector x is not changed when transforming it using an orthogonal matrix A. For the dot product, we obtain
 ?Ax?2 = (Ax)?(Ax) = x?A?Ax = x?Ix = x?x = ?x?2 .  (3.31)
Moreover, the angle between any two vectors x, y, as measured by their inner product, is also unchanged when transforming both of them using an orthogonal matrix A. Assuming the dot product as the inner product, the angle of the images Ax and Ay is given as

(Ax)?(Ay)
cos ? = ?Ax? ?Ay? = l

x?A?Ay
?	?

x?y
=	,
?x? ?y?


(3.32)


which gives exactly the angle between x and y. This means that orthog- onal matrices A with A? = A-1 preserve both angles and distances. It turns out that orthogonal matrices define transformations that are rota- tions (with the possibility of flips). In Section 3.9, we will discuss more details about rotations.

3.5 Orthonormal Basis
In Section 2.6.1, we characterized properties of basis vectors and found that in an n-dimensional vector space, we need n basis vectors, i.e., n vectors that are linearly independent. In Sections 3.3 and 3.4, we used inner products to compute the length of vectors and the angle between vectors. In the following, we will discuss the special case where the basis vectors are orthogonal to each other and where the length of each basis vector is 1. We will call this basis then an orthonormal basis.

3.6 Orthogonal Complement	79
Let us introduce this more formally.
Definition 3.9 (Orthonormal Basis). Consider an n-dimensional vector space V and a basis {b1,	, bn} of V . If
?bi, bj? = 0	for i ?= j	(3.33)
?bi, bi? = 1	(3.34)
for all i, j = 1, . . . , n then the basis is called an orthonormal basis (ONB).	orthonormal basis

If only (3.33) is satisfied, then the basis is called an orthogonal basis. Note that (3.34) implies that every basis vector has length/norm 1.
  Recall from Section 2.6.1 that we can use Gaussian elimination to find a basis for a vector space spanned by a set of vectors. Assume we are given a set {b˜1, . . . , b˜n} of non-orthogonal and unnormalized basis vectors. We

ONB
orthogonal basis

concatenate them into a matrix B˜ = [b˜1, . . . , b˜n] and apply Gaussian elim-
ination to the augmented matrix (Section 2.3.2) [B˜ B˜ ? B˜ ] to obtain an
orthonormal basis. This constructive way to iteratively build an orthonor- mal basis {b1, . . . , bn} is called the Gram-Schmidt process (Strang, 2003).


  We will exploit the concept of an orthonormal basis in Chapter 12 and Chapter 10 when we discuss support vector machines and principal com- ponent analysis.


3.6 Complement
Having defined orthogonality, we will now look at vector spaces that are orthogonal to each other. This will play an important role in Chapter 10, when we discuss linear dimensionality reduction from a geometric per- spective.
Consider a D-dimensional vector space V and an M -dimensional sub-
space U ? V . Then its orthogonal complement U ? is a (D-M )-dimensional orthogonal

subspace of V and contains all vectors in V that are orthogonal to every vector in U . Furthermore, U n U ? = {0} so that any vector x ? V can be

complement


Figure 3.7 A plane
U in a
three-dimensional vector space can be described by its normal vector, which spans its orthogonal complement U ?.





uniquely decomposed into
M
x =	?mbm +
m=1



D-M
?jbj?,	?m, ?j	R ,	(3.36)
j=1









normal vector

where (b1, . . . , bM ) is a basis of U and (b1?, . . . , b?D M ) is a basis of U ?.
Therefore, the orthogonal complement can also be used to describe a
plane U (two-dimensional subspace) in a three-dimensional vector space. More specifically, the vector w with w = 1, which is orthogonal to the plane U , is the basis vector of U ?. Figure 3.7 illustrates this setting. All vectors that are orthogonal to w must (by construction) lie in the plane
U . The vector w is called the normal vector of U .
  Generally, orthogonal complements can be used to describe hyperplanes in n-dimensional vector and affine spaces.

3.7 Product of Functions
Thus far, we looked at properties of inner products to compute lengths, angles and distances. We focused on inner products of finite-dimensional vectors. In the following, we will look at an example of inner products of a different type of vectors: inner products of functions.
  The inner products we discussed so far were defined for vectors with a finite number of entries. We can think of a vector x Rn as a function with n function values. The concept of an inner product can be generalized to vectors with an infinite number of entries (countably infinite) and also continuous-valued functions (uncountably infinite). Then the sum over individual components of vectors (see Equation (3.5) for example) turns into an integral.
  An inner product of two functions u : R R and v : R R can be defined as the definite integral

?u, v? :=


b
u(x)v(x)dx	(3.37)
a

for lower and upper limits a, b < , respectively. As with our usual inner product, we can define norms and orthogonality by looking at the inner product. If (3.37) evaluates to 0, the functions u and v are orthogonal. To make the preceding inner product mathematically precise, we need to take care of measures and the definition of integrals, leading to the definition of a Hilbert space. Furthermore, unlike inner products on finite-dimensional vectors, inner products on functions may diverge (have infinite value). All this requires diving into some more intricate details of real and functional analysis, which we do not cover in this book.


Figure 3.8 f (x) = sin(x) cos(x).

0.5



Remark. It also holds that the collection of functions
                {1, cos(x), cos(2x), cos(3x), . . . }	(3.38)
is orthogonal if we integrate from p to p, i.e., any pair of functions are orthogonal to each other. The collection of functions in (3.38) spans a large subspace of the functions that are even and periodic on [ p, p), and projecting functions onto this subspace is the fundamental idea behind Fourier series.	?
  In Section 6.4.6, we will have a look at a second type of unconventional inner products: the inner product of random variables.

0.0



-0.5  2.5	0.0	2.5
x


3.8 Projections
Projections are an important class of linear transformations (besides rota- tions and reflections) and play an important role in graphics, coding the- ory, statistics and machine learning. In machine learning, we often deal with data that is high-dimensional. High-dimensional data is often hard to analyze or visualize. However, high-dimensional data quite often pos- sesses the property that only a few dimensions contain most information, and most other dimensions are not essential to describe key properties of the data. When we compress or visualize high-dimensional data, we will lose information. To minimize this compression loss, we ideally find
the most informative dimensions in the data. As discussed in Chapter 1,  "Feature" is a

data can be represented as vectors, and in this chapter, we will discuss some of the fundamental tools for data compression. More specifically, we can project the original high-dimensional data onto a lower-dimensional feature space and work in this lower-dimensional space to learn more about the dataset and extract relevant patterns. For example, machine

common expression for data representation.



Figure 3.9 Orthogonal projection (orange dots) of a
two-dimensional dataset (blue dots) onto a
one-dimensional subspace (straight line).



2

1

0

-1
-2

4	2	0	2	4
x1






















projection




projection matrix




line


learning algorithms, such as principal component analysis (PCA) by Pear- son (1901) and Hotelling (1933) and deep neural networks (e.g., deep auto-encoders (Deng et al., 2010)), heavily exploit the idea of dimension- ality reduction. In the following, we will focus on orthogonal projections, which we will use in Chapter 10 for linear dimensionality reduction and in Chapter 12 for classification. Even linear regression, which we discuss in Chapter 9, can be interpreted using orthogonal projections. For a given lower-dimensional subspace, orthogonal projections of high-dimensional data retain as much information as possible and minimize the difference/ error between the original data and the corresponding projection. An il- lustration of such an orthogonal projection is given in Figure 3.9. Before we detail how to obtain these projections, let us define what a projection actually is.
Definition 3.10 (Projection). Let V be a vector space and U ? V a subspace of V . A linear mapping p : V ? U is called a projection if p2 = p ? p = p.
  Since linear mappings can be expressed by transformation matrices (see Section 2.7), the preceding definition applies equally to a special kind of transformation matrices, the projection matrices P p, which exhibit the property that P 2 = P p.
  In the following, we will derive orthogonal projections of vectors in the inner product space (Rn, , ) onto subspaces. We will start with one- dimensional subspaces, which are also called lines. If not mentioned oth- erwise, we assume the dot product ?x, y? = x?y as the inner product.

3.8.1 onto One-Dimensional Subspaces (Lines)
Assume we are given a line (one-dimensional subspace) through the ori- gin with basis vector b ? Rn. The line is a one-dimensional subspace U ? Rn spanned by b. When we project x ? Rn onto U , we seek the vector pU (x) ? U that is closest to x. Using geometric arguments, let

Figure 3.10 Examples of projections onto one-dimensional subspaces.







(a) Projection of x ? R2 onto a subspace U
with basis vector b.


(b) Projection of a two-dimensional vector x with ?x? = 1 onto a one-dimensional subspace spanned by b.



us characterize some properties of the projection pU (x) (Figure 3.10(a) serves as an illustration):

The projection pU (x) is closest to x, where "closest" implies that the distance x pU (x) is minimal. It follows that the segment pU (x) x from pU (x) to x is orthogonal to U , and therefore the basis vector b of
U . The orthogonality condition yields pU (x)  x, b = 0 since angles
between vectors are defined via the inner product.	? is then the

The projection pU (x) of x onto U must be an element of U and, there- fore, a multiple of the basis vector b that spans U . Hence, pU (x) = ?b, for some ? ? R.
In the following three steps, we determine the coordinate ?, the projection
pU (x) ? U , and the projection matrix P p that maps any x ? Rn onto U :
1. Finding the coordinate ?. The orthogonality condition yields

coordinate of pU (x)
with respect to b.


?x - pU (x), b? = 0	??	?x - ?b, b? = 0 .	(3.39)

We can now exploit the bilinearity of the inner product and arrive at	With a general inner
product, we get

?x, b? - ? ?b, b? = 0 ?? ? = ?x, b? = ?b, x? .	(3.40)

? = ?x, b? if

?b, b?	?b?2

?b? = 1.

In the last step, we exploited the fact that inner products are symmet- ric. If we choose ?·, ·? to be the dot product, we obtain

b?x	b?x
                     ? = b?b = ?b?2 .	(3.41) If ?b? = 1, then the coordinate ? of the projection is given by b?x.

2. Finding the projection point pU (x)	U . Since pU (x) = ?b, we imme- diately obtain with (3.40) that
p (x) = ?b = ?x, b? b = b?x b ,	(3.42)
?b?2	?b?2
where the last equality holds for the dot product only. We can also compute the length of pU (x) by means of Definition 3.1 as
               ?pU (x)? = ??b? = |?| ?b? .	(3.43)
Hence, our projection is of length ? times the length of b. This also adds the intuition that ? is the coordinate of pU (x) with respect to the basis vector b that spans our one-dimensional subspace U .
If we use the dot product as an inner product, we get

?p (x)? (3.42) |b?x| ?b? (3.25) | cos ?| ?x? ?b? ?b?


= | cos ?| ?x? .

U	=	=
?b?2

?b?2


(3.44)




The horizontal axis is a one-dimensional subspace.

Here, ? is the angle between x and b. This equation should be familiar from trigonometry: If x = 1, then x lies on the unit circle. It follows that the projection onto the horizontal axis spanned by b is exactly cos ?, and the length of the corresponding vector pU (x) = cos ? . An illustration is given in Figure 3.10(b).
3. Finding the projection matrix P p. We know that a projection is a lin- ear mapping (see Definition 3.10). Therefore, there exists a projection matrix P p, such that pU (x) = P px. With the dot product as inner product and


pU (x) = ?b = b? = b

we immediately see that

b?x


?b?2

bb?
=
?b?2


x ,	(3.45)


P p =

bb?


?b?2


.	(3.46)


Projection matrices are always symmetric.

Note that bb? (and, consequently, P p) is a symmetric matrix (of rank
1), and ?b?2 = ?b, b? is a scalar.
The projection matrix P p projects any vector x Rn onto the line through the origin with direction b (equivalently, the subspace U spanned by b).
Remark. The projection pU (x) Rn is still an n-dimensional vector and not a scalar. However, we no longer require n coordinates to represent the projection, but only a single one if we want to express it with respect to the basis vector b that spans the subspace U : ?.	?















0	b1

Figure 3.11 Projection onto a two-dimensional subspace U with basis b1, b2. The projection pU (x) of x	R3 onto U can be expressed as a linear combination of b1, b2 and the displacement vector x	pU (x) is orthogonal to both b1 and b2.





Remark. With the results from Chapter 4, we can show that pU (x) is an eigenvector of P p, and the corresponding eigenvalue is 1.	?



3.8.2 onto General Subspaces
In the following, we look at orthogonal projections of vectors x Rn onto lower-dimensional subspaces U Rn with dim(U ) = m ? 1. An illustration is given in Figure 3.11.
Assume that (b1, . . . , bm) is an ordered basis of U . Any projection pU (x)
onto U is necessarily an element of U . Therefore, they can be represented



If U is given by a set of spanning vectors, which are not a basis, make sure you determine a basis b1, . . . , bm before proceeding.

as linear combinations of the basis vectors b1, . . . , bm of U , such that

The basis vectors

p (x) =  m  ? b .



B ? Rn×m, where
B = [b1, . . . , bm].

tion pU (x) and the projection matrix P p:

1. Find the coordinates ?1, . . . , ?m of the projection (with respect to the basis of U ), such that the linear combination
m
pU (x) =	?ibi = B? ,	(3.49)
i=1
B = [b1, . . . , bm] ? Rn×m,	? = [?1, . . . , ?m]? ? Rm ,	(3.50)
is closest to x Rn. As in the 1D case, "closest" means "minimum distance", which implies that the vector connecting pU (x)  U and x Rn must be orthogonal to all basis vectors of U . Therefore, we obtain m simultaneous conditions (assuming the dot product as the inner product)
?b1, x - pU (x)? = b1?(x - pU (x)) = 0	(3.51)
.
            ?bm, x - pU (x)? = b?m(x - pU (x)) = 0	(3.52) which, with pU (x) = B?, can be written as
b1?(x - B?) = 0	(3.53)
.
b?m(x - B?) = 0	(3.54)
such that we obtain a homogeneous linear equation system
?b1? ? ?	?

??b?m

?? ?x - B?? = 0 ?? B

(x - B?) = 0	(3.55)



normal equation

??  B?B? = B?x .	(3.56)
The last expression is called normal equation. Since b1, . . . , bm are a basis of U and, therefore, linearly independent, B?B Rm×m is reg- ular and can be inverted. This allows us to solve for the coefficients/ coordinates




pseudo-inverse

? = (B?B)-1B?x .	(3.57)
The matrix (B?B)-1B? is also called the pseudo-inverse of B, which can be computed for non-square matrices B. It only requires that B?B is positive definite, which is the case if B is full rank. In practical ap- plications (e.g., linear regression), we often add a "jitter term" ?I to

B?B to guarantee increased numerical stability and positive definite- ness. This "ridge" can be rigorously derived using Bayesian inference. See Chapter 9 for details.
2. Find the projection pU (x)  U . We already established that pU (x) =
B?. Therefore, with (3.57)
pU (x) = B(B?B)-1B?x .	(3.58)
3. Find the projection matrix P p. From (3.58), we can immediately see that the projection matrix that solves P px = pU (x) must be
P p = B(B?B)-1B? .	(3.59)
Remark. The solution for projecting onto general subspaces includes the 1D case as a special case: If dim(U ) = 1, then B?B R is a scalar and we can rewrite the projection matrix in (3.59) P p = B(B?B)-1B? as
P	= BB? , which is exactly the projection matrix in (3.46).	?





projection error
The projection error is also called the reconstruction error.




















We can find approximate solutions to unsolvable linear equation systems using projections.





least-squares

Remark. The projections pU (x) are still vectors in Rn although they lie in an m-dimensional subspace U Rn. However, to represent a projected vector we only need the m coordinates ?1, . . . , ?m with respect to the basis vectors b1, . . . , bm of U .	?
Remark. In vector spaces with general inner products, we have to pay attention when computing angles and distances, which are defined by means of the inner product.	?
  Projections allow us to look at situations where we have a linear system Ax = b without a solution. Recall that this means that b does not lie in the span of A, i.e., the vector b does not lie in the subspace spanned by the columns of A. Given that the linear equation cannot be solved exactly, we can find an approximate solution. The idea is to find the vector in the subspace spanned by the columns of A that is closest to b, i.e., we compute the orthogonal projection of b onto the subspace spanned by the columns of A. This problem arises often in practice, and the solution is called the least-squares solution (assuming the dot product as the inner product) of

solution	an overdetermined system. This is discussed further in Section 9.4. Using reconstruction errors (3.63) is one possible approach to derive principal component analysis (Section 10.3).
Remark. We just looked at projections of vectors x onto a subspace U with basis vectors b1, . . . , bk . If this basis is an ONB, i.e., (3.33) and (3.34) are satisfied, the projection equation (3.58) simplifies greatly to
pU (x) = BB?x	(3.65)
since B?B = I with coordinates
? = B?x .	(3.66)
This means that we no longer have to compute the inverse from (3.58), which saves computation time.	?

3.8.3 Orthogonalization
Projections are at the core of the Gram-Schmidt method that allows us to constructively transform any basis (b1, . . . , bn) of an n-dimensional vector space V into an orthogonal/orthonormal basis (u1, . . . , un) of V . This basis always exists (Liesen and Mehrmann, 2015) and span[b1, . . . , bn] =
span[u1, . . . , un]. The Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization method iteratively  Gram-Schmidt

constructs an orthogonal basis (u1, . . . , un) from any basis (b1, . . . , bn) of
V as follows:
u1 := b1	(3.67)
       uk := bk - pspan[u1 ,...,uk-1 ](bk) ,	k = 2, . . . , n .	(3.68)
In (3.68), the kth basis vector bk is projected onto the subspace spanned by the first k 1 constructed orthogonal vectors u1, . . . , uk-1; see Sec- tion 3.8.2. This projection is then subtracted from bk and yields a vector uk that is orthogonal to the (k - 1)-dimensional subspace spanned by u1, . . . , uk-1. Repeating this procedure for all n basis vectors b1, . . . , bn yields an orthogonal basis (u1, . . . , un) of V . If we normalize the uk, we obtain an ONB where ?uk? = 1 for k = 1, . . . , n.

orthogonalization





Figure 3.12
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization.
(a) non-orthogonal basis (b1, b2) of R2;
(b) first constructed basis vector u1 and orthogonal
onto span[u1];
(c) orthogonal basis
(u1, u2) of R2.

Figure 3.13 Projection onto an affine space.
(a) original setting;
(b) setting shifted by -x0 so that
x	x0 can be
projected onto the direction space U ;
(c) projection is
translated back to	0	b1



0	b1

x0 + pU (x	x0),
which gives the final orthogonal projection pL(x).
(a) 
Setting.
(b) 
Reduce problem to pro- jection pU onto vector sub- space.
(c) 
Add support point back in to get affine projection pL.






3.8.4 onto Affine Subspaces
Thus far, we discussed how to project a vector onto a lower-dimensional subspace U . In the following, we provide a solution to projecting a vector onto an affine subspace.
  Consider the setting in Figure 3.13(a). We are given an affine space L = x0 + U , where b1, b2 are basis vectors of U . To determine the orthogonal projection pL(x) of x onto L, we transform the problem into a problem that we know how to solve: the projection onto a vector subspace. In order to get there, we subtract the support point x0 from x and from L, so that L x0 = U is exactly the vector subspace U . We can now use the orthogonal projections onto a subspace we discussed in Section 3.8.2 and obtain the projection pU (x x0), which is illustrated in Figure 3.13(b). This projection can now be translated back into L by adding x0, such that we obtain the orthogonal projection onto an affine space L as
pL(x) = x0 + pU (x - x0) ,	(3.72)
where pU ( ) is the orthogonal projection onto the subspace U , i.e., the direction space of L; see Figure 3.13(c).
  From Figure 3.13, it is also evident that the distance of x from the affine space L is identical to the distance of x - x0 from U , i.e.,
d(x, L) = ?x - pL(x)? = ?x - (x0 + pU (x - x0))?	(3.73a)
= d(x - x0, pU (x - x0)) = d(x - x0, U ) .	(3.73b)
  We will use projections onto an affine subspace to derive the concept of a separating hyperplane in Section 12.1.


Figure 3.14 A rotation rotates objects in a plane about the origin. If the rotation angle is positive, we rotate counterclockwise.










Figure 3.15 The robotic arm needs to rotate its joints in order to pick up objects or to place them correctly.
Figure taken from (Deisenroth et al., 2015).





3.9 
Length and angle preservation, as discussed in Section 3.4, are the two characteristics of linear mappings with orthogonal transformation matri- ces. In the following, we will have a closer look at specific orthogonal transformation matrices, which describe rotations.
A rotation is a linear mapping (more specifically, an automorphism of  rotation
a Euclidean vector space) that rotates a plane by an angle ? about the origin, i.e., the origin is a fixed point. For a positive angle ? > 0, by com- mon convention, we rotate in a counterclockwise direction. An example is shown in Figure 3.14, where the transformation matrix is
R =  -0.38  -0.92  .	(3.74)
0.92	-0.38
Important application areas of rotations include computer graphics and robotics. For example, in robotics, it is often important to know how to rotate the joints of a robotic arm in order to pick up or place an object, see Figure 3.15.



Figure 3.16 Rotation of the standard basis in R2 by an angle ?.

F(e2) = [- sin ?, cos ?]?





cos ?





F(e1) = [cos ?, sin ?]?







- sin ?

e1	cos ?


3.9.1 in R2
Consider the standard basis fe1 = ( l , e = ( l1 of R2, which defines
1	0
		







rotation matrix

the standard coordinate system in R2. We aim to rotate this coordinate system by an angle ? as illustrated in Figure 3.16. Note that the rotated vectors are still linearly independent and, therefore, are a basis of R2. This means that the rotation performs a basis change.
  Rotations F are linear mappings so that we can express them by a rotation matrix R(?). Trigonometry (see Figure 3.16) allows us to de- termine the coordinates of the rotated axes (the image of F) with respect to the standard basis in R2. We obtain
F(e ) = (cos ?l ,	F(e ) = (- sin ?l .	(3.75)


Therefore, the rotation matrix that performs the basis change into the rotated coordinates R(?) is given as
R(?) = [F(e )  F(e )] = (cos ?	- sin ?l .	(3.76)
3.9.2 in R3
In contrast to the R2 case, in R3 we can rotate any two-dimensional plane about a one-dimensional axis. The easiest way to specify the general rota- tion matrix is to specify how the images of the standard basis e1, e2, e3 are supposed to be rotated, and making sure these images Re1, Re2, Re3 are orthonormal to each other. We can then obtain a general rotation matrix R by combining the images of the standard basis.
  To have a meaningful rotation angle, we have to define what "coun- terclockwise" means when we operate in more than two dimensions. We use the convention that a "counterclockwise" (planar) rotation about an axis refers to a rotation about an axis when we look at the axis "head on, from the end toward the origin". In R3, there are therefore three (planar) rotations about the three standard basis vectors (see Figure 3.17):


Figure 3.17 Rotation of a vector (gray) in R3 by an angle ? about the e3-axis. The rotated vector is shown in blue.







Rotation about the e1-axis

[

]	?1	0	0	?



Here, the e1 coordinate is fixed, and the counterclockwise rotation is performed in the e2e3 plane.
Rotation about the e2-axis
? cos ?	0	sin ??

R2(?) = ?

0	1	0
- sin ?	0  cos ?

? .	(3.78)


If we rotate the e1e3 plane about the e2 axis, we need to look at the e2
axis from its "tip" toward the origin. Rotation about the e3-axis
?cos ?	- sin ?	0?
0	0	1

Figure 3.17 illustrates this.


3.9.3 in n Dimensions
The generalization of rotations from 2D and 3D to n-dimensional Eu- clidean vector spaces can be intuitively described as fixing n 2 dimen- sions and restrict the rotation to a two-dimensional plane in the n-dimen- sional space. As in the three-dimensional case, we can rotate any plane (two-dimensional subspace of Rn).
Definition 3.11 (Givens Rotation). Let V be an n-dimensional Euclidean vector space and F : V ? V an automorphism with transformation ma-

trix

?Ii-1	0	· · ·	· · ·	0 ?

Rij(?) := ??

0	cos ?	0	- sin ?	0
0	0	Ij-i-1	0	0
0	sin ?	0	cos ?	0
0	· · ·	· · ·	0	In-j

? ? Rn×n ,	(3.80)


Givens rotation

for 1 ? i < j ? n and ?  R. Then Rij(?) is called a Givens rotation.
Essentially, Rij(?) is the identity matrix In with
    rii = cos ? ,	rij = - sin ? ,	rji = sin ? ,	rjj = cos ? .	(3.81) In two dimensions (i.e., n = 2), we obtain (3.76) as a special case.

3.9.4 of Rotations
Rotations exhibit a number of useful properties, which can be derived by considering them as orthogonal matrices (Definition 3.8):
Rotations preserve distances, i.e., x y = R?(x) R?(y) . In other words, rotations leave the distance between any two points unchanged after the transformation.
Rotations preserve angles, i.e., the angle between R?x and R?y equals the angle between x and y.
Rotations in three (or more) dimensions are generally not commuta- tive. Therefore, the order in which rotations are applied is important, even if they rotate about the same point. Only in two dimensions vector rotations are commutative, such that R(?)R(?) = R(?)R(?) for all ?, ? [0, 2p). They form an Abelian group (with multiplication) only if they rotate about the same point (e.g., the origin).

3.10 Reading
In this chapter, we gave a brief overview of some of the important concepts of analytic geometry, which we will use in later chapters of the book. For a broader and more in-depth overview of some of the concepts we presented, we refer to the following excellent books: Axler (2015) and Boyd and Vandenberghe (2018).
  Inner products allow us to determine specific bases of vector (sub)spaces, where each vector is orthogonal to all others (orthogonal bases) using the Gram-Schmidt method. These bases are important in optimization and numerical algorithms for solving linear equation systems. For instance, Krylov subspace methods, such as conjugate gradients or the generalized minimal residual method (GMRES), minimize residual errors that are or- thogonal to each other (Stoer and Burlirsch, 2002).
In machine learning, inner products are important in the context of

3.10 Further Reading	95
kernel methods (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002). Kernel methods exploit the fact that many linear algorithms can be expressed purely by inner prod- uct computations. Then, the "kernel trick" allows us to compute these inner products implicitly in a (potentially infinite-dimensional) feature space, without even knowing this feature space explicitly. This allowed the "non-linearization" of many algorithms used in machine learning, such as kernel-PCA (Scho¨lkopf et al., 1997) for dimensionality reduction. Gaus- sian processes (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) also fall into the category of kernel methods and are the current state of the art in probabilistic re- gression (fitting curves to data points). The idea of kernels is explored further in Chapter 12.
  Projections are often used in computer graphics, e.g., to generate shad- ows. In optimization, orthogonal projections are often used to (iteratively) minimize residual errors. This also has applications in machine learning, e.g., in linear regression where we want to find a (linear) function that minimizes the residual errors, i.e., the lengths of the orthogonal projec- tions of the data onto the linear function (Bishop, 2006). We will investi- gate this further in Chapter 9. PCA (Pearson, 1901; Hotelling, 1933) also uses projections to reduce the dimensionality of high-dimensional data. We will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 10.

Exercises
3.1	Show that ?·, ·? defined for all x = [x1, x2]? ? R2 and y = [y1, y2]? ? R2 by
?x, y? := x1y1 - (x1y2 + x2y1) + 2(x2y2)
is an inner product.
3.2	Consider R2 with ?·, ·? defined for all x and y in R2 as
?x, y? := x? (2  0l y .
.. =..:,,A ..

Is ,	an inner product?
3.3	Compute the distance between
?1?

?-1?




using
a. ?x, y? := x?y
b. ?x, y? := x?Ay ,	A :=

3	0



2	1	0
1	3	-1
0  -1	2

3.4	Compute the angle between
x = (1l ,	y = (-1l
2	-1
using
a. ?x, y? := x?y
b. ?x, y? := x?By ,	B := (2  1l
3.5	Consider the Euclidean vector space R5 with the dot product. A subspace
U ? R5 and x ? R5 are given by

? 0 ?
?-1?

? 1 ?
?-3?

?-3?
?	?

?-1?
?-3?

?-1?
?-9?

U = span[? 2 ? , ? 1 ? , ? 1 ? , ? 5 ?] ,	x = ?-1? .

a. Determine the orthogonal projection pU (x) of x onto U
b. Determine the distance d(x, U)
3.6	Consider R3 with the inner product


?x, y? := x?

1	2	-1  y .
0  -1	2

Furthermore, we define e1, e2, e3 as the standard/canonical basis in R3.

Exercises	97
a. Determine the orthogonal projection pU (e2) of e2 onto
U = span[e1, e3] .
Hint: Orthogonality is defined through the inner product.
b. Compute the distance d(e2, U).
c. Draw the scenario: standard basis vectors and pU (e2)
3.7	Let V be a vector space and p an endomorphism of V .
a. Prove that p is a projection if and only if idV - p is a projection, where
idV is the identity endomorphism on V .
b. Assume now that p is a projection. Calculate Im(idV  p) and ker(idV  p)
as a function of Im(p) and ker(p).

3.8	Using the Gram-Schmidt method, turn the basis B = (b1, b2) of a two- dimensional subspace U ? R3 into an ONB C = (c1, c2) of U, where
?1?	?-1?
b1 := ?1? ,	b2 := ? 2 ? .
3.9	Let n ? N and let x1, . . . , xn > 0 be n positive real numbers so that x1 +
. . . + xn = 1. Use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and show that
a.  n	x2 ? 1

i=1 i
b.	n	 1

n
? n2

i=1 xi
Hint: Think about the dot product on Rn. Then, choose specific vectors
x, y	Rn and apply the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
3.10 Rotate the vectors
x1 := (2l ,	x2 := ( 0 l


by 30?.

3	-1




4


Matrix Decompositions




























matrix factorization

In Chapters 2 and 3, we studied ways to manipulate and measure vectors, projections of vectors, and linear mappings. Mappings and transforma- tions of vectors can be conveniently described as operations performed by matrices. Moreover, data is often represented in matrix form as well, e.g., where the rows of the matrix represent different people and the columns describe different features of the people, such as weight, height, and socio- economic status. In this chapter, we present three aspects of matrices: how to summarize matrices, how matrices can be decomposed, and how these decompositions can be used for matrix approximations.
  We first consider methods that allow us to describe matrices with just a few numbers that characterize the overall properties of matrices. We will do this in the sections on determinants (Section 4.1) and eigenval- ues (Section 4.2) for the important special case of square matrices. These characteristic numbers have important mathematical consequences and allow us to quickly grasp what useful properties a matrix has. From here we will proceed to matrix decomposition methods: An analogy for ma- trix decomposition is the factoring of numbers, such as the factoring of 21 into prime numbers 7 3. For this reason matrix decomposition is also often referred to as matrix factorization. Matrix decompositions are used to describe a matrix by means of a different representation using factors of interpretable matrices.
  We will first cover a square-root-like operation for symmetric, positive definite matrices, the Cholesky decomposition (Section 4.3). From here we will look at two related methods for factorizing matrices into canoni- cal forms. The first one is known as matrix diagonalization (Section 4.4), which allows us to represent the linear mapping using a diagonal trans- formation matrix if we choose an appropriate basis. The second method, singular value decomposition (Section 4.5), extends this factorization to non-square matrices, and it is considered one of the fundamental concepts in linear algebra. These decompositions are helpful, as matrices represent- ing numerical data are often very large and hard to analyze. We conclude the chapter with a systematic overview of the types of matrices and the characteristic properties that distinguish them in the form of a matrix tax- onomy (Section 4.7).
The methods that we cover in this chapter will become important in
98
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Figure 4.1 A mind map of the concepts introduced in this chapter, along with where they are used in other parts of the book.






















both subsequent mathematical chapters, such as Chapter 6, but also in applied chapters, such as dimensionality reduction in Chapters 10 or den- sity estimation in Chapter 11. This chapter's overall structure is depicted in the mind map of Figure 4.1.

4.1 Determinant and Trace	The determinant

Determinants are important concepts in linear algebra. A determinant is a mathematical object in the analysis and solution of systems of linear equations. Determinants are only defined for square matrices A Rn×n, i.e., matrices with the same number of rows and columns. In this book, we write the determinant as det(A) or sometimes as |A| so that

notation A must not be confused with the absolute value.

a11	a12	. . .	a1n
1 a21	a22	. . .	a2n  1

det(A) =
1	.

. . .	.

.	(4.1)
1

1 an1	an2	. . .  ann 1
The determinant of a square matrix A ? Rn×n is a function that maps A	determinant

onto a real number. Before providing a definition of the determinant for general n n matrices, let us have a look at some motivating examples, and define determinants for some special matrices.

  Example 4.1 points already at the relationship between determinants and the existence of inverse matrices. The next theorem states the same result for n × n matrices.
Theorem 4.1. For any square matrix A ? Rn×n it holds that A is invertible if and only if det(A) ?= 0.
  We have explicit (closed-form) expressions for determinants of small matrices in terms of the elements of the matrix. For n = 1,
det(A) = det(a11) = a11 .	(4.5)

For n = 2,

det(A) = 1a



12 = a11
22



a22


- a12



a21



,	(4.6)

which we have observed in the preceding example.
For n = 3 (known as Sarrus' rule),
a11	a12	a13

a21	a22	a23
1a31	a32	a331

= a11a22a33 + a21a32a13 + a31a12a23	(4.7)

- a31a22a13 - a11a32a23 - a21a12a33 .

For a memory aid of the product terms in Sarrus' rule, try tracing the elements of the triple products in the matrix.
We call a square matrix T an upper-triangular matrix if Tij = 0 for	upper-triangular

i > j, i.e., the matrix is zero below its diagonal. Analogously, we define a

matrix

lower-triangular matrix as a matrix with zeros above its diagonal. For a tri-	lower-triangular

angular matrix T	Rn×n, the determinant is the product of the diagonal elements, i.e.,

matrix

n
det(T ) =	Tii .	(4.8)
i=1




The determinant is the signed volume of the parallelepiped formed by the columns of the matrix.
Figure 4.2 The area of the parallelogram (shaded region) spanned by the vectors b and g is
|det([b, g])|.



Figure 4.3 The volume of the parallelepiped (shaded volume) spanned by vectors r, b, g is
|det([r, b, g])|.






The sign of the determinant

orientation of the spanning vectors.













Laplace expansion



det(Ak,j ) is called a minor and
  
Computing the determinant of an n n matrix requires a general algo- rithm to solve the cases for n > 3, which we are going to explore in the fol- lowing. Theorem 4.2 below reduces the problem of computing the deter- minant of an n n matrix to computing the determinant of (n 1) (n 1) matrices. By recursively applying the Laplace expansion (Theorem 4.2), we can therefore compute determinants of n × n matrices by ultimately computing determinants of 2 × 2 matrices.
Theorem 4.2 (Laplace Expansion). Consider a matrix A	Rn×n. Then, for all j = 1, . . . , n:
1. Expansion along column j
n

( 1)k+j det(Ak,j )
a cofactor.

det(A) =	(-1)k+jakj
k=1

det(A


k,j

) .	(4.12)

2. Expansion along row j
n
det(A) =	(-1)k+jajk det(Aj,k) .	(4.13)
k=1
Here Ak,j	R(n-1)×(n-1) is the submatrix of A that we obtain when delet- ing row k and column j.





For A ? Rn×n the determinant exhibits the following properties:
The determinant of a matrix product is the product of the corresponding determinants, det(AB) = det(A)det(B).
Determinants are invariant to transposition, i.e., det(A) = det(A?). If A is regular (invertible), then det(A-1) =  1	 .
Similar matrices (Definition 2.22) possess the same determinant. There- fore, for a linear mapping F : V  V all transformation matrices AF of F have the same determinant. Thus, the determinant is invariant to the choice of basis of a linear mapping.
Adding a multiple of a column/row to another one does not change
det(A).
Multiplication of a column/row with ? R scales det(A) by ?. In particular, det(?A) = ?n det(A).
Swapping two rows/columns changes the sign of det(A).
Because of the last three properties, we can use Gaussian elimination (see Section 2.1) to compute det(A) by bringing A into row-echelon form. We can stop Gaussian elimination when we have A in a triangular form where the elements below the diagonal are all 0. Recall from (4.8) that the determinant of a triangular matrix is the product of the diagonal elements.
Theorem 4.3. A square matrix A  Rn×n has det(A) = 0 if and only if
rk(A) = n. In other words, A is invertible if and only if it is full rank.
  When mathematics was mainly performed by hand, the determinant calculation was considered an essential way to analyze matrix invertibil- ity. However, contemporary approaches in machine learning use direct numerical methods that superseded the explicit calculation of the deter- minant. For example, in Chapter 2, we learned that inverse matrices can be computed by Gaussian elimination. Gaussian elimination can thus be used to compute the determinant of a matrix.
  Determinants will play an important theoretical role for the following sections, especially when we learn about eigenvalues and eigenvectors (Section 4.2) through the characteristic polynomial.
Definition 4.4. The trace of a square matrix A ? Rn×n is defined as	trace


















The trace is invariant under


n
tr(A) :=	aii ,	(4.18)
i=1
i.e. , the trace is the sum of the diagonal elements of A. The trace satisfies the following properties:
tr(A + B) = tr(A) + tr(B) for A, B	Rn×n tr(aA) = atr(A) , a	R for A	Rn×n tr(In) = n
tr(AB) = tr(BA) for A ? Rn×k, B ? Rk×n
It can be shown that only one function satisfies these four properties to- gether - the trace (Gohberg et al., 2012).
  The properties of the trace of matrix products are more general. Specif- ically, the trace is invariant under cyclic permutations, i.e.,

cyclic permutations.	tr(AKL) = tr(KLA)	(4.19)
for matrices A Ra×k, K Rk×l, L Rl×a. This property generalizes to products of an arbitrary number of matrices. As a special case of (4.19), it follows that for two vectors x, y ? Rn
             tr(xy?) = tr(y?x) = y?x ? R .	(4.20)
  Given a linear mapping F : V  V , where V is a vector space, we define the trace of this map by using the trace of matrix representation of F. For a given basis of V , we can describe F by means of the transfor- mation matrix A. Then the trace of F is the trace of A. For a different basis of V , it holds that the corresponding transformation matrix B of F can be obtained by a basis change of the form S-1AS for suitable S (see Section 2.7.2). For the corresponding trace of F, this means

tr(B) = tr(S-1

AS)

=  tr(ASS	) = tr(A) .	(4.21)

















characteristic polynomial

Hence, while matrix representations of linear mappings are basis depen- dent the trace of a linear mapping F is independent of the basis.
  In this section, we covered determinants and traces as functions char- acterizing a square matrix. Taking together our understanding of determi- nants and traces we can now define an important equation describing a matrix A in terms of a polynomial, which we will use extensively in the following sections.
Definition 4.5 (Characteristic Polynomial). For ? ? R and a square ma- trix A ? Rn×n
pA(?) := det(A - ?I)	(4.22a)
= c0 + c1? + c2?2 + · · · + cn-1?n-1 + (-1)n?n ,	(4.22b)
c0, . . . , cn-1 ? R, is the characteristic polynomial of A. In particular,

c0 = det(A) ,	(4.23)
cn-1 = (-1)n-1tr(A) .	(4.24)
  The characteristic polynomial (4.22a) will allow us to compute eigen- values and eigenvectors, covered in the next section.

4.2 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
We will now get to know a new way to characterize a matrix and its associ- ated linear mapping. Recall from Section 2.7.1 that every linear mapping has a unique transformation matrix given an ordered basis. We can in- terpret linear mappings and their associated transformation matrices by
performing an "eigen" analysis. As we will see, the eigenvalues of a lin-  Eigen is a German

ear mapping will tell us how a special set of vectors, the eigenvectors, is transformed by the linear mapping.
Definition 4.6. Let A ? Rn×n be a square matrix. Then ? ? R is an

word meaning "characteristic", "self", or "own".

eigenvalue of A and x ? Rn\{0} is the corresponding eigenvector of A if	eigenvalue

Ax = ?x .	(4.25)

eigenvector

We call (4.25) the eigenvalue equation.	eigenvalue equation
Remark. In the linear algebra literature and software, it is often a conven- tion that eigenvalues are sorted in descending order, so that the largest eigenvalue and associated eigenvector are called the first eigenvalue and its associated eigenvector, and the second largest called the second eigen- value and its associated eigenvector, and so on. However, textbooks and publications may have different or no notion of orderings. We do not want to presume an ordering in this book if not stated explicitly.	?
The following statements are equivalent:
? is an eigenvalue of A ? Rn×n.
There exists an x ? Rn\{0} with Ax = ?x, or equivalently, (A -
?In)x = 0 can be solved non-trivially, i.e., x ?= 0.
rk(A - ?In) < n.
det(A - ?In) = 0.
Definition 4.7 (Collinearity and Codirection). Two vectors that point in
the same direction are called codirected. Two vectors are collinear if they  codirected

point in the same or the opposite direction.
Remark (Non-uniqueness of eigenvectors). If x is an eigenvector of A associated with eigenvalue ?, then for any c R 0 it holds that cx is an eigenvector of A with the same eigenvalue since
                 A(cx) = cAx = c?x = ?(cx) .	(4.26) Thus, all vectors that are collinear to x are also eigenvectors of A.

collinear

?





algebraic

Theorem 4.8. ?	R is an eigenvalue of A	Rn×n if and only if ? is a root of the characteristic polynomial pA(?) of A.
Definition 4.9. Let a square matrix A have an eigenvalue ?i. The algebraic

multiplicity	multiplicity of ?i is the number of times the root appears in the character- istic polynomial.
Definition 4.10 (Eigenspace and Eigenspectrum). For A	Rn×n, the set of all eigenvectors of A associated with an eigenvalue ? spans a subspace

eigenspace eigenspectrum spectrum

of Rn, which is called the eigenspace of A with respect to ? and is denoted by E?. The set of all eigenvalues of A is called the eigenspectrum, or just spectrum, of A.
  If ? is an eigenvalue of A Rn×n, then the corresponding eigenspace E? is the solution space of the homogeneous system of linear equations (A ?I)x = 0. Geometrically, the eigenvector corresponding to a nonzero eigenvalue points in a direction that is stretched by the linear mapping. The eigenvalue is the factor by which it is stretched. If the eigenvalue is negative, the direction of the stretching is flipped.




  Useful properties regarding eigenvalues and eigenvectors include the following:

A matrix A and its transpose A? possess the same eigenvalues, but not necessarily the same eigenvectors.
The eigenspace E? is the null space of A - ?I since
Ax = ?x ??  Ax - ?x = 0	(4.27a)
?? (A - ?I)x = 0 ?? x ? ker(A - ?I).	(4.27b)
Similar matrices (see Definition 2.22) possess the same eigenvalues. Therefore, a linear mapping F has eigenvalues that are independent of the choice of basis of its transformation matrix. This makes eigenvalues, together with the determinant and the trace, key characteristic param- eters of a linear mapping as they are all invariant under basis change.
Symmetric, positive definite matrices always have positive, real eigen- values.


Example	4.5	(Computing	Eigenvalues,	Eigenvectors,	and Eigenspaces)
Let us find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 2 × 2 matrix
A =  4  2  .	(4.28)
1  3
  Step 1: Characteristic Polynomial. From our definition of the eigen- vector x = 0 and eigenvalue ? of A, there will be a vector such that Ax = ?x, i.e., (A ?I)x = 0. Since x = 0, this requires that the kernel (null space) of A ?I contains more elements than just 0. This means that A ?I is not invertible and therefore det(A ?I) = 0. Hence, we need to compute the roots of the characteristic polynomial (4.22a) to find the eigenvalues.
Step 2: Eigenvalues. The characteristic polynomial is
pA(?) = det(A - ?I)	(4.29a)

= det ((4  2l - (?	0li = 14 - ?	2


(4.29b)

= (4 - ?)(3 - ?) - 2 · 1 .	(4.29c)
We factorize the characteristic polynomial and obtain
p(?) = (4 - ?)(3 - ?) - 2 · 1 = 10 - 7? + ?2 = (2 - ?)(5 - ?)  (4.30)
giving the roots ?1 = 2 and ?2 = 5.
  Step 3: Eigenvectors and Eigenspaces. We find the eigenvectors that correspond to these eigenvalues by looking at vectors x such that



For ? = 5 we obtain

4 - ?	2
1	3 - ?

l x = 0 .	(4.31)

(4 - 5	2

l (x1l = (-1	2 l (x1l = 0 .	(4.32)

1	3 - 5	x2	1	-2	x2
We solve this homogeneous system and obtain a solution space
E  = span[(2l] .	(4.33)

This eigenspace is one-dimensional as it possesses a single basis vector.
  Analogously, we find the eigenvector for ? = 2 by solving the homoge- neous system of equations

4 - 2	2
1	3 - 2

l x = (2 2l x = 0 .	(4.34)












geometric
  
The two eigenspaces E5 and E2 in Example 4.5 are one-dimensional as they are each spanned by a single vector. However, in other cases we may have multiple identical eigenvalues (see Definition 4.9) and the eigenspace may have more than one dimension.
Definition 4.11. Let ?i be an eigenvalue of a square matrix A. Then the
geometric multiplicity of ?i is the number of linearly independent eigen-

multiplicity	vectors associated with ?i. In other words, it is the dimensionality of the eigenspace spanned by the eigenvectors associated with ?i.
Remark. A specific eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity must be at least one because every eigenvalue has at least one associated eigenvector. An eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity cannot exceed its algebraic multiplic- ity, but it may be lower.	?








In geometry, the area-preserving properties of this type of shearing parallel to an axis is also known as Cavalieri's principle of equal areas for parallelograms

Graphical Intuition in Two Dimensions
Let us gain some intuition for determinants, eigenvectors, and eigenval- ues using different linear mappings. Figure 4.4 depicts five transformation matrices A1, . . . , A5 and their impact on a square grid of points, centered at the origin:
1

A1 =  2   . The direction of the two eigenvectors correspond to the
0	2
canonical basis vectors in R2, i.e., to two cardinal axes. The vertical axis is extended by a factor of 2 (eigenvalue ?1 = 2), and the horizontal axis is compressed by factor 1 (eigenvalue ?2 = 1 ). The mapping is area preserving (det(A1) = 1 = 2 · 1 ).

(Katz, 2004).

A  = (1

2
1
2	corresponds to a shearing mapping , i.e., it shears the

2	0	1
points along the horizontal axis to the right if they are on the positive





?1 = 2.0
?2 = 0.5
det(A) = 1.0





?1 = 1.0
?2 = 1.0
det(A) = 1.0






?1 = (0.87-0.5j) ?2 = (0.87+0.5j) det(A) = 1.0






?1 = 0.0
?2 = 2.0
det(A) = 0.0



?1 = 0.5
?2 = 1.5
det(A) = 0.75

Figure 4.4 Determinants and eigenspaces.
Overview of five linear mappings and their associated transformation matrices
Ai ? R2×2
projecting 400 color-coded points x	R2 (left
column) onto target points Aix (right column). The central column depicts the first eigenvector, stretched by its associated eigenvalue ?1, and the second eigenvector stretched by its eigenvalue ?2. Each row depicts the effect of one of five transformation matrices Ai with respect to the standard basis.


half of the vertical axis, and to the left vice versa. This mapping is area preserving (det(A2) = 1). The eigenvalue ?1 = 1 = ?2 is repeated and the eigenvectors are collinear (drawn here for emphasis in two opposite directions). This indicates that the mapping acts only along
one direction (the horizontal axis)v.	l
(cos( p ) - sin( p )l	1 ( 3	-1
points by p rad = 30? counter-clockwise and has only complex eigen- values, reflecting that the mapping is a rotation (hence, no eigenvectors are drawn). A rotation has to be volume preserving, and so the deter- minant is 1. For more details on rotations, we refer to Section 3.9.
A  =	1	-1 represents a mapping in the standard basis that col-
-1	1
lapses a two-dimensional domain onto one dimension. Since one eigen-

value is 0, the space in direction of the (blue) eigenvector corresponding to ?1 = 0 collapses, while the orthogonal (red) eigenvector stretches space by a factor ?2 = 2. Therefore, the area of the image is 0.
1	1
2	1
since  det(A5)  = 3 . It stretches space along the (red) eigenvector
of ?2 by a factor 1.5 and compresses it along the orthogonal (blue) eigenvector by a factor 0.5.

Example 4.7 (Eigenspectrum of a Biological Neural Network)


Figure 4.5 Caenorhabditis elegans neural network (Kaiser and Hilgetag,
2006).(a) Sym-
metrized connectivity matrix;
(b) Eigenspectrum.


0


50


100


150


200


250



















0	50	100	150	200	250
neuron index
(a) Connectivity matrix.



25

20

15

10

5

0

-5
-10



















0	100	200
index of sorted eigenvalue
(b) Eigenspectrum.

  Methods to analyze and learn from network data are an essential com- ponent of machine learning methods. The key to understanding networks is the connectivity between network nodes, especially if two nodes are connected to each other or not. In data science applications, it is often useful to study the matrix that captures this connectivity data.
  We build a connectivity/adjacency matrix A R277×277 of the complete neural network of the worm C.Elegans. Each row/column represents one of the 277 neurons of this worm's brain. The connectivity matrix A has a value of aij = 1 if neuron i talks to neuron j through a synapse, and aij = 0 otherwise. The connectivity matrix is not symmetric, which im- plies that eigenvalues may not be real valued. Therefore, we compute a symmetrized version of the connectivity matrix as Asym := A + A?. This new matrix Asym is shown in Figure 4.5(a) and has a nonzero value aij if and only if two neurons are connected (white pixels), irrespective of the direction of the connection. In Figure 4.5(b), we show the correspond- ing eigenspectrum of Asym. The horizontal axis shows the index of the eigenvalues, sorted in descending order. The vertical axis shows the corre- sponding eigenvalue. The S-like shape of this eigenspectrum is typical for many biological neural networks. The underlying mechanism responsible for this is an area of active neuroscience research.

Theorem 4.12. The eigenvectors x1, . . . , xn of a matrix A	Rn×n with n
distinct eigenvalues ?1, . . . , ?n are linearly independent.
  This theorem states that eigenvectors of a matrix with n distinct eigen- values form a basis of Rn.
Definition 4.13. A square matrix A  Rn×n is defective if it possesses  defective
fewer than n linearly independent eigenvectors.
  A non-defective matrix A Rn×n does not necessarily require n dis- tinct eigenvalues, but it does require that the eigenvectors form a basis of Rn. Looking at the eigenspaces of a defective matrix, it follows that the sum of the dimensions of the eigenspaces is less than n. Specifically, a de- fective matrix has at least one eigenvalue ?i with an algebraic multiplicity m > 1 and a geometric multiplicity of less than m.
Remark. A defective matrix cannot have n distinct eigenvalues, as distinct eigenvalues have linearly independent eigenvectors (Theorem 4.12).	?
Theorem 4.14. Given a matrix A ? Rm×n, we can always obtain a sym- metric, positive semidefinite matrix S ? Rn×n by defining
S := A?A .	(4.36)
Remark. If rk(A) = n, then S := A?A is symmetric, positive definite.
?
  Understanding why Theorem 4.14 holds is insightful for how we can use symmetrized matrices: Symmetry requires S = S?, and by insert- ing (4.36) we obtain S = A?A = A?(A?)? = (A?A)? = S?. More- over, positive semidefiniteness (Section 3.2.3) requires that x?Sx ? 0 and inserting (4.36) we obtain x?Sx = x?A?Ax = (x?A?)(Ax) = (Ax)?(Ax) ? 0, because the dot product computes a sum of squares (which are themselves non-negative).

Theorem 4.15 (Spectral Theorem). If A  Rn×n is symmetric, there ex- ists an orthonormal basis of the corresponding vector space V consisting of eigenvectors of A, and each eigenvalue is real.
  A direct implication of the spectral theorem is that the eigendecompo- sition of a symmetric matrix A exists (with real eigenvalues), and that we can find an ONB of eigenvectors so that A = PDP ?, where D is diagonal and the columns of P contain the eigenvectors.

spectral theorem





The characteristic polynomial of A is
pA(?) = -(? - 1)2(? - 7) ,	(4.38)
so that we obtain the eigenvalues ?1 = 1 and ?2 = 7, where ?1 is a repeated eigenvalue. Following our standard procedure for computing eigenvectors, we obtain the eigenspaces
?-1? ?-1?	?1?
E1 = span[? 1 ?, ? 0 ?],	E7 = span[?1?] .	(4.39)

..=..:x,,1 .. ..=..:x,,2 ..	..=..:x,,3..
We see that x3 is orthogonal to both x1 and x2. However, since x1?x2 = 1 = 0, they are not orthogonal. The spectral theorem (Theorem 4.15) states that there exists an orthogonal basis, but the one we have is not orthogonal. However, we can construct one.
  To construct such a basis, we exploit the fact that x1, x2 are eigenvec- tors associated with the same eigenvalue ?. Therefore, for any a, ß R it holds that
     A(ax1 + ßx2) = Ax1a + Ax2ß = ?(ax1 + ßx2) ,	(4.40)
i.e., any linear combination of x1 and x2 is also an eigenvector of A as- sociated with ?. The Gram-Schmidt algorithm (Section 3.8.3) is a method for iteratively constructing an orthogonal/orthonormal basis from a set of basis vectors using such linear combinations. Therefore, even if x1 and x2 are not orthogonal, we can apply the Gram-Schmidt algorithm and find eigenvectors associated with ?1 = 1 that are orthogonal to each other (and to x3). In our example, we will obtain
?-1?	1 ?-1?
x'1 = ? 1 ? ,	x'2 = 2 ?-1? ,	(4.41)

which are orthogonal to each other, orthogonal to x3, and eigenvectors of
A associated with ?1 = 1.

  Before we conclude our considerations of eigenvalues and eigenvectors it is useful to tie these matrix characteristics together with the concepts of the determinant and the trace.
Theorem 4.16. The determinant of a matrix A	Rn×n is the product of its eigenvalues, i.e.,
n
det(A) =	?i ,	(4.42)
i=1
where ?i ? C are (possibly repeated) eigenvalues of A.




x2	A
v2
x1	v1

Theorem 4.17. The trace of a matrix A	Rn×n is the sum of its eigenval- ues, i.e.,
n
tr(A) =	?i ,	(4.43)
i=1
where ?i ? C are (possibly repeated) eigenvalues of A.
  Let us provide a geometric intuition of these two theorems. Consider a matrix A R2×2 that possesses two linearly independent eigenvectors x1, x2. For this example, we assume (x1, x2) are an ONB of R2 so that they are orthogonal and the area of the square they span is 1; see Figure 4.6. From Section 4.1, we know that the determinant computes the change of area of unit square under the transformation A. In this example, we can compute the change of area explicitly: Mapping the eigenvectors using A gives us vectors v1 = Ax1 = ?1x1 and v2 = Ax2 = ?2x2, i.e., the new vectors vi are scaled versions of the eigenvectors xi, and the scaling factors are the corresponding eigenvalues ?i. v1, v2 are still orthogonal, and the area of the rectangle they span is ?1?2 .
  Given that x1, x2 (in our example) are orthonormal, we can directly compute the perimeter of the unit square as 2(1 + 1). Mapping the eigen- vectors using A creates a rectangle whose perimeter is 2( ?1 + ?2 ). Therefore, the sum of the absolute values of the eigenvalues tells us how the perimeter of the unit square changes under the transformation matrix A.

Figure 4.6 Geometric interpretation of eigenvalues. The eigenvectors of A get stretched by the corresponding eigenvalues. The area of the unit square changes by ?1?2 , the perimeter changes by a factor of 1 (|?1| + |?2|).








PageRank

















Cholesky
4.3 
Cholesky Decomposition
There are many ways to factorize special types of matrices that we en- counter often in machine learning. In the positive real numbers, we have the square-root operation that gives us a decomposition of the number into identical components, e.g., 9 = 3 3. For matrices, we need to be careful that we compute a square-root-like operation on positive quanti- ties. For symmetric, positive definite matrices (see Section 3.2.3), we can choose from a number of square-root equivalent operations. The Cholesky

decomposition	decomposition/Cholesky factorization provides a square-root equivalent op-

Cholesky factorization

eration on symmetric, positive definite matrices that is useful in practice.
Theorem 4.18 (Cholesky Decomposition). A symmetric, positive definite matrix A can be factorized into a product A = LL?, where L is a lower- triangular matrix with positive diagonal elements:

??a11	· · ·	a1n??	??l11	· · ·	0 ?? ??l11	· · ·	ln1 ??
?an1	· · ·  ann?	?ln1	· · ·  lnn? ? 0	· · ·  lnn?


Cholesky factor

L is called the Cholesky factor of A, and L is unique.






  The Cholesky decomposition is an important tool for the numerical computations underlying machine learning. Here, symmetric positive def- inite matrices require frequent manipulation, e.g., the covariance matrix of a multivariate Gaussian variable (see Section 6.5) is symmetric, positive definite. The Cholesky factorization of this covariance matrix allows us to generate samples from a Gaussian distribution. It also allows us to perform a linear transformation of random variables, which is heavily exploited when computing gradients in deep stochastic models, such as the varia- tional auto-encoder (Jimenez Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma and Welling, 2014). The Cholesky decomposition also allows us to compute determi- nants very efficiently. Given the Cholesky decomposition A = LL?, we know that det(A) = det(L) det(L?) = det(L)2. Since L is a triangular matrix, the determinant is simply the product of its diagonal entries so
that det(A) =  i l2 . Thus, many numerical software packages use the
Cholesky decomposition to make computations more efficient.

4.4 Eigendecomposition and Diagonalization
A diagonal matrix is a matrix that has value zero on all off-diagonal ele-	diagonal matrix
ments, i.e., they are of the form

0	· · ·  cn
They allow fast computation of determinants, powers, and inverses. The determinant is the product of its diagonal entries, a matrix power Dk is given by each diagonal element raised to the power k, and the inverse D-1 is the reciprocal of its diagonal elements if all of them are nonzero.
In this section, we will discuss how to transform matrices into diagonal










diagonalizable

form. This is an important application of the basis change we discussed in Section 2.7.2 and eigenvalues from Section 4.2.
  Recall that two matrices A, D are similar (Definition 2.22) if there ex- ists an invertible matrix P , such that D = P -1AP . More specifically, we will look at matrices A that are similar to diagonal matrices D that con- tain the eigenvalues of A on the diagonal.
Definition 4.19 (Diagonalizable). A matrix A Rn×n is diagonalizable if it is similar to a diagonal matrix, i.e., if there exists an invertible matrix P ? Rn×n such that D = P -1AP .
  In the following, we will see that diagonalizing a matrix A Rn×n is a way of expressing the same linear mapping but in another basis (see Section 2.6.1), which will turn out to be a basis that consists of the eigen- vectors of A.
  Let A  Rn×n, let ?1, . . . , ?n be a set of scalars, and let p1, . . . , pn be a set of vectors in Rn. We define P := [p1, . . . , pn] and let D  Rn×n be a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries ?1, . . . , ?n. Then we can show that
AP = PD	(4.50)
if and only if ?1, . . . , ?n are the eigenvalues of A and p1, . . . , pn are cor- responding eigenvectors of A.
We can see that this statement holds because
AP = A[p1, . . . , pn] = [Ap1, . . . , Apn] ,	(4.51)


PD = [p1, . . . , pn]

??1
?


. . .

0
= [?1p1, . . . , ?n


pn] .	(4.52)


Thus, (4.50) implies that

0	?n


Ap1 = ?1p1	(4.53)
.
Apn = ?npn .	(4.54)

Therefore, the columns of P must be eigenvectors of A.
  Our definition of diagonalization requires that P Rn×n is invertible, i.e., P has full rank (Theorem 4.3). This requires us to have n linearly independent eigenvectors p1, . . . , pn, i.e., the pi form a basis of Rn.
Theorem 4.20 (Eigendecomposition). A square matrix A Rn×n can be factored into
A = PDP -1 ,	(4.55)
where P	Rn×n and D is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the eigenvalues of A, if and only if the eigenvectors of A form a basis of Rn.






e2
p2 	 A

Figure 4.7 Intuition behind the eigendecomposition as sequential transformations.

e1	Top-left to
bottom-left: P -1 performs a basis change (here drawn

P -1
P



D




  Theorem 4.20 implies that only non-defective matrices can be diagonal- ized and that the columns of P are the n eigenvectors of A. For symmetric matrices we can obtain even stronger outcomes for the eigenvalue decom- position.
Theorem 4.21. A symmetric matrix S ? Rn×n can always be diagonalized.
  Theorem 4.21 follows directly from the spectral theorem 4.15. More- over, the spectral theorem states that we can find an ONB of eigenvectors of Rn. This makes P an orthogonal matrix so that D = P ?AP .
Remark. The Jordan normal form of a matrix offers a decomposition that works for defective matrices (Lang, 1987) but is beyond the scope of this book.	?

Geometric Intuition for the Eigendecomposition
We can interpret the eigendecomposition of a matrix as follows (see also Figure 4.7): Let A be the transformation matrix of a linear mapping with respect to the standard basis ei (blue arrows). P -1 performs a basis change from the standard basis into the eigenbasis. Then, the diagonal D scales the vectors along these axes by the eigenvalues ?i. Finally, P transforms these scaled vectors back into the standard/canonical coordi- nates yielding ?ipi.

in R2 and depicted as a rotation-like operation) from the standard basis into the eigenbasis.
Bottom-left to bottom-right: D performs a scaling along the remapped orthogonal eigenvectors, depicted here by a circle being stretched to an ellipse. Bottom-right to top-right: P undoes the basis change (depicted as a reverse rotation) and restores the original coordinate frame.

































Figure 4.7 visualizes the eigendecomposition of A = 5	-2 
as a sequence of linear transformations.


Diagonal matrices D can efficiently be raised to a power. Therefore, we can find a matrix power for a matrix A Rn×n via the eigenvalue decomposition (if it exists) so that
Ak = (PDP -1)k = PDkP -1 .	(4.62)

Computing Dk is efficient because we apply this operation individually to any diagonal element.
Assume that the eigendecomposition A = PDP -1 exists. Then,
det(A) = det(PDP -1) = det(P ) det(D) det(P -1)	(4.63a)

= det(D) = IT dii	(4.63b)

allows for an efficient computation of the determinant of A.

  The eigenvalue decomposition requires square matrices. It would be useful to perform a decomposition on general matrices. In the next sec- tion, we introduce a more general matrix decomposition technique, the singular value decomposition.




4.5 Singular Value Decomposition
The singular value decomposition (SVD) of a matrix is a central matrix decomposition method in linear algebra. It has been referred to as the "fundamental theorem of linear algebra" (Strang, 1993) because it can be applied to all matrices, not only to square matrices, and it always exists. Moreover, as we will explore in the following, the SVD of a matrix A, which represents a linear mapping F : V  W , quantifies the change between the underlying geometry of these two vector spaces. We recom- mend the work by Kalman (1996) and Roy and Banerjee (2014) for a deeper overview of the mathematics of the SVD.

Theorem 4.22 (SVD Theorem). Let A ? Rm×n be a rectangular matrix of















SVD theorem

rank r	[0, min(m, n)]. The SVD of A is a decomposition of the form	SVD
singular value

n	m	n
n
=




(4.64)

decomposition


with an orthogonal matrix U ? Rm×m with column vectors ui, i = 1, . . . , m, and an orthogonal matrix V ? Rn×n with column vectors vj, j = 1, . . . , n. Moreover, S is an m × n matrix with Sii = si ? 0 and Sij = 0, i ?= j.
The diagonal entries si, i = 1, . . . , r, of S are called the singular values,	singular values
ui are called the left-singular vectors, and vj are called the right-singular	left-singular vectors

vectors. By convention, the singular values are ordered, i.e., s1 ? s2 ?
sr ? 0.

right-singular vectors

The singular value matrix S is unique, but it requires some attention.	singular value

Observe that the S Rm×n is rectangular. In particular, S is of the same size as A. This means that S has a diagonal submatrix that contains the singular values and needs additional zero padding. Specifically, if m > n, then the matrix S has diagonal structure up to row n and then consists of

matrix


Figure 4.8 Intuition behind the SVD of a matrix A	R3×2 as sequential
transformations.	A
Top-left to bottom-left: V ? performs a basis
change in R2.	U
Bottom-left to bottom-right: S scales and maps from R2 to R3. The
ellipse in the	S
bottom-right lives in R3. The third dimension is orthogonal to the

surface of the elliptical disk. Bottom-right to top-right: U

0? row vectors from n + 1 to m below so that
s1	0	0
. . .

performs a basis

change within R3.

S = ? 0	0	s

n? .	(4.65)


0	. . .	0
If m < n, the matrix S has a diagonal structure up to column m and columns that consist of 0 from m + 1 to n:


0	. . .	0	.

. ?? .	(4.66)

0	0	sm	0  . . .  0
Remark. The SVD exists for any matrix A ? Rm×n.	?

4.5.1 Geometric Intuitions for the SVD
The SVD offers geometric intuitions to describe a transformation matrix
A. In the following, we will discuss the SVD as sequential linear trans- formations performed on the bases. In Example 4.12, we will then apply transformation matrices of the SVD to a set of vectors in R2, which allows us to visualize the effect of each transformation more clearly.
  The SVD of a matrix can be interpreted as a decomposition of a corre- sponding linear mapping (recall Section 2.7.1) F : Rn  Rm into three operations; see Figure 4.8. The SVD intuition follows superficially a simi- lar structure to our eigendecomposition intuition, see Figure 4.7: Broadly speaking, the SVD performs a basis change via V ? followed by a scal- ing and augmentation (or reduction) in dimensionality via the singular

value matrix S. Finally, it performs a second basis change via U . The SVD entails a number of important details and caveats, which is why we will
review our intuition in more detail.	It is useful to review

  Assume we are given a transformation matrix of a linear mapping F : Rn  Rm with respect to the standard bases B and C of Rn and Rm, respectively. Moreover, assume a second basis B˜ of Rn and C˜ of Rm. Then
1. The matrix V performs a basis change in the domain Rn from B˜ (rep- resented by the red and orange vectors v1 and v2 in the top-left of Fig- ure 4.8) to the standard basis B. V ? = V -1 performs a basis change from B to B˜. The red and orange vectors are now aligned with the canonical basis in the bottom-left of Figure 4.8.
2. Having changed the coordinate system to B˜, S scales the new coordi- nates by the singular values si (and adds or deletes dimensions), i.e.,

basis changes (Section 2.7.2), orthogonal matrices (Definition 3.8) and orthonormal bases (Section 3.5).

S is the transformation matrix of F with respect to B˜ and C˜, rep-
resented by the red and orange vectors being stretched and lying in the e1-e2 plane, which is now embedded in a third dimension in the bottom-right of Figure 4.8.
3. U performs a basis change in the codomain Rm from C˜ into the canoni- cal basis of Rm, represented by a rotation of the red and orange vectors out of the e1-e2 plane. This is shown in the top-right of Figure 4.8.
The SVD expresses a change of basis in both the domain and codomain. This is in contrast with the eigendecomposition that operates within the same vector space, where the same basis change is applied and then un- done. What makes the SVD special is that these two different bases are simultaneously linked by the singular value matrix S.












Figure 4.9 SVD and mapping of vectors (represented by discs). The panels follow the same
anti-clockwise structure of Figure 4.8.






















4.5.2 Construction of the SVD
We will next discuss why the SVD exists and show how to compute it in detail. The SVD of a general matrix shares some similarities with the eigendecomposition of a square matrix.
Remark. Compare the eigendecomposition of an SPD matrix
S = S? = PDP ?	(4.68)

with the corresponding SVD


If we set



S = U SV ? .	(4.69)

U = P = V ,	D = S ,	(4.70)
we see that the SVD of SPD matrices is their eigendecomposition.	?
  In the following, we will explore why Theorem 4.22 holds and how the SVD is constructed. Computing the SVD of A Rm×n is equivalent to finding two sets of orthonormal bases U = (u1, . . . , um) and V = (v1, . . . , vn) of the codomain Rm and the domain Rn, respectively. From these ordered bases, we will construct the matrices U and V .
  Our plan is to start with constructing the orthonormal set of right- singular vectors v1, . . . , vn  Rn. We then construct the orthonormal set of left-singular vectors u1, . . . , um  Rm. Thereafter, we will link the two and require that the orthogonality of the vi is preserved under the trans- formation of A. This is important because we know that the images Avi form a set of orthogonal vectors. We will then normalize these images by scalar factors, which will turn out to be the singular values.
  Let us begin with constructing the right-singular vectors. The spectral theorem (Theorem 4.15) tells us that the eigenvectors of a symmetric matrix form an ONB, which also means it can be diagonalized. More- over, from Theorem 4.14 we can always construct a symmetric, positive semidefinite matrix A?A	Rn×n from any rectangular matrix A Rm×n. Thus, we can always diagonalize A?A and obtain

0	· · ·  ?n
where P is an orthogonal matrix, which is composed of the orthonormal eigenbasis. The ?i ? 0 are the eigenvalues of A?A. Let us assume the SVD of A exists and inject (4.64) into (4.71). This yields
A?A = (U SV ?)?(U SV ?) = V S?U ?U SV ? ,	(4.72)
where U , V are orthogonal matrices. Therefore, with U ?U = I we ob- tain

2
1
A?A = V S?SV ? = V ?? 0

0	0
. . .	V ? .	(4.73)


Comparing now (4.71) and (4.73), we identify
V ? = P ? ,	(4.74)
s2 = ?i .	(4.75)

Therefore, the eigenvectors of A?A that compose P are the right-singular vectors V of A (see (4.74)). The eigenvalues of A?A are the squared singular values of S (see (4.75)).
  To obtain the left-singular vectors U , we follow a similar procedure. We start by computing the SVD of the symmetric matrix AA? ? Rm×m (instead of the previous A?A ? Rn×n). The SVD of A yields
AA? = (U SV ?)(U SV ?)? = U SV ?V S?U ?	(4.76a)

2
1
= U ?? 0

0	0
. . .	U ? .	(4.76b)

0	0	s2
The spectral theorem tells us that AA? = SDS? can be diagonalized and we can find an ONB of eigenvectors of AA?, which are collected in
S. The orthonormal eigenvectors of AA? are the left-singular vectors U
and form an orthonormal basis in the codomain of the SVD.
  This leaves the question of the structure of the matrix S. Since AA? and A?A have the same nonzero eigenvalues (see page 106), the nonzero entries of the S matrices in the SVD for both cases have to be the same.
  The last step is to link up all the parts we touched upon so far. We have an orthonormal set of right-singular vectors in V . To finish the construc- tion of the SVD, we connect them with the orthonormal vectors U . To reach this goal, we use the fact the images of the vi under A have to be orthogonal, too. We can show this by using the results from Section 3.4. We require that the inner product between Avi and Avj must be 0 for i ?= j. For any two orthogonal eigenvectors vi, vj, i ?= j, it holds that
   (Avi)?(Avj) = vi?(A?A)vj = vi?(?jvj) = ?jvi?vj = 0 .	(4.77)
For the case m ? r, it holds that Av1, . . . , Avr is a basis of an r- dimensional subspace of Rm.
  To complete the SVD construction, we need left-singular vectors that are orthonormal: We normalize the images of the right-singular vectors Avi and obtain
Avi	1	1
ui := ?Av ? = v? Avi = s Avi ,	(4.78)









singular value equation

where the last equality was obtained from (4.75) and (4.76b), showing us that the eigenvalues of AA? are such that s2 = ?i.
  Therefore, the eigenvectors of A?A, which we know are the right- singular vectors vi, and their normalized images under A, the left-singular vectors ui, form two self-consistent ONBs that are connected through the singular value matrix S.
Let us rearrange (4.78) to obtain the singular value equation
Avi = siui ,	i = 1, . . . , r .	(4.79)

This equation closely resembles the eigenvalue equation (4.25), but the vectors on the left- and the right-hand sides are not the same.
  For n < m, (4.79) holds only for i ? n, but (4.79) says nothing about the ui for i > n. However, we know by construction that they are or- thonormal. Conversely, for m < n, (4.79) holds only for i ? m. For i > m, we have Avi = 0 and we still know that the vi form an orthonormal set. This means that the SVD also supplies an orthonormal basis of the kernel (null space) of A, the set of vectors x with Ax = 0 (see Section 2.7.3).
Concatenating the vi as the columns of V and the ui as the columns of
U yields
AV = U S ,	(4.80)
where S has the same dimensions as A and a diagonal structure for rows 1, . . . , r. Hence, right-multiplying with V ? yields A = U SV ?, which is the SVD of A.






4.5.3 Eigenvalue Decomposition vs. Singular Value Decomposition
Let us consider the eigendecomposition A = PDP -1 and the SVD A =
U SV ? and review the core elements of the past sections.
The SVD always exists for any matrix Rm×n. The eigendecomposition is only defined for square matrices Rn×n and only exists if we can find a basis of eigenvectors of Rn.
The vectors in the eigendecomposition matrix P are not necessarily orthogonal, i.e., the change of basis is not a simple rotation and scaling. On the other hand, the vectors in the matrices U and V in the SVD are orthonormal, so they do represent rotations.
Both the eigendecomposition and the SVD are compositions of three linear mappings:
1. Change of basis in the domain
2. Independent scaling of each new basis vector and mapping from do- main to codomain
3. Change of basis in the codomain



Star Wars? 5	4	1 ?	??

0.4647	-0.5774 ??

Figure 4.10 Movie ratings of three people for four movies and its SVD decomposition.


Delicatessen

0	0	5
1	0	4

?
????	0


??

-0.5268	-0.3464
0.5293	-0.5774
0	0
0
0	0.7056
0	0
-0.1811 ??



A key difference between the eigendecomposition and the SVD is that in the SVD, domain and codomain can be vector spaces of different dimensions.
In the SVD, the left- and right-singular vector matrices U and V are generally not inverse of each other (they perform basis changes in dif- ferent vector spaces). In the eigendecomposition, the basis change ma- trices P and P -1 are inverses of each other.
In the SVD, the entries in the diagonal matrix S are all real and non- negative, which is not generally true for the diagonal matrix in the eigendecomposition.
The SVD and the eigendecomposition are closely related through their projections
- The left-singular vectors of A are eigenvectors of AA?
- The right-singular vectors of A are eigenvectors of A?A.
- The nonzero singular values of A are the square roots of the nonzero eigenvalues of both AA? and A?A.
For symmetric matrices A Rn×n, the eigenvalue decomposition and the SVD are one and the same, which follows from the spectral theo- rem 4.15.



















These two "spaces" are only meaningfully spanned by the respective viewer and movie data if the data itself covers a sufficient diversity of viewers and movies.




















full SVD
  
It is worth to briefly discuss SVD terminology and conventions, as there are different versions used in the literature. While these differences can be confusing, the mathematics remains invariant to them.
For convenience in notation and abstraction, we use an SVD notation where the SVD is described as having two square left- and right-singular vector matrices, but a non-square singular value matrix. Our defini- tion (4.64) for the SVD is sometimes called the full SVD.
Some authors define the SVD a bit differently and focus on square sin- gular matrices. Then, for A ? Rm×n and m ? n,

A  =  U	S V ? .	(4.89)
m×n	m×n n×n n×n

Sometimes this formulation is called the reduced SVD (e.g., Datta (2010)) reduced SVD
or the SVD (e.g., Press et al. (2007)). This alternative format changes merely how the matrices are constructed but leaves the mathematical structure of the SVD unchanged. The convenience of this alternative formulation is that S is diagonal, as in the eigenvalue decomposition.
In Section 4.6, we will learn about matrix approximation techniques
using the SVD, which is also called the truncated SVD.	truncated SVD
It is possible to define the SVD of a rank-r matrix A so that U is an m  r matrix, S a diagonal matrix r  r, and V an r  n matrix. This construction is very similar to our definition, and ensures that the diagonal matrix S has only nonzero entries along the diagonal. The main convenience of this alternative notation is that S is diagonal, as in the eigenvalue decomposition.
A restriction that the SVD for A only applies to m n matrices with m > n is practically unnecessary. When m < n, the SVD decomposition will yield S with more zero columns than rows and, consequently, the singular values sm+1, . . . , sn are 0.
  The SVD is used in a variety of applications in machine learning from least-squares problems in curve fitting to solving systems of linear equa- tions. These applications harness various important properties of the SVD, its relation to the rank of a matrix, and its ability to approximate matrices of a given rank with lower-rank matrices. Substituting a matrix with its SVD has often the advantage of making calculation more robust to nu- merical rounding errors. As we will explore in the next section, the SVD's ability to approximate matrices with "simpler" matrices in a principled manner opens up machine learning applications ranging from dimension- ality reduction and topic modeling to data compression and clustering.

4.6 Matrix Approximation
We considered the SVD as a way to factorize A = U SV ?  Rm×n into the product of three matrices, where U Rm×m and V Rn×n are or- thogonal and S contains the singular values on its main diagonal. Instead of doing the full SVD factorization, we will now investigate how the SVD allows us to represent a matrix A as a sum of simpler (low-rank) matrices Ai, which lends itself to a matrix approximation scheme that is cheaper to compute than the full SVD.
We construct a rank-1 matrix Ai ? Rm×n as
Ai := uivi? ,	(4.90)
which is formed by the outer product of the ith orthogonal column vector of U and V . Figure 4.11 shows an image of Stonehenge, which can be represented by a matrix A R1432×1910, and some outer products Ai, as defined in (4.90).

Figure 4.11 Image processing with the SVD. (a) The original grayscale image is a
1, 432	1, 910
matrix of values between 0 (black)
and 1 (white). (b)-(f) Rank-1 matrices
A1, . . . , A5 and
their corresponding singular values
s1, . . . , s5. The
grid-like structure of each rank-1 matrix is imposed by the outer-product of the left and
right-singular vectors.


  
(a) Original image A.	(b) A1, s1 ˜ 228, 052.	(c) A2, s2 ˜ 40, 647.

(d) A3, s3 ˜ 26, 125.	(e) A4, s4 ˜ 20, 232.	(f) A5, s5 ˜ 15, 436.

A matrix A	Rm×n of rank r can be written as a sum of rank-1 matrices
Ai so that

r	r
A = L siuivi? = L siAi ,	(4.91)
	













rank-k approximation

where the outer-product matrices Ai are weighted by the ith singular value si. We can see why (4.91) holds: The diagonal structure of the singular value matrix S multiplies only matching left- and right-singular vectors uivi? and scales them by the corresponding singular value si. All terms Sijuivj? vanish for i = j because S is a diagonal matrix. Any terms i > r vanish because the corresponding singular values are 0.
  In (4.90), we introduced rank-1 matrices Ai. We summed up the r in- dividual rank-1 matrices to obtain a rank-r matrix A; see (4.91). If the sum does not run over all matrices Ai, i = 1, . . . , r, but only up to an intermediate value k < r, we obtain a rank-k approximation

k	k
A? (k) := L siuivi? = L siAi	(4.92)
	
of A with rk(A(k)) = k. Figure 4.12 shows low-rank approximations A(k) of an original image A of Stonehenge. The shape of the rocks be- comes increasingly visible and clearly recognizable in the rank-5 approx- imation. While the original image requires 1, 432 1, 910 = 2, 735, 120 numbers, the rank-5 approximation requires us only to store the five sin- gular values and the five left- and right-singular vectors (1, 432 and 1, 910- dimensional each) for a total of 5 (1, 432 + 1, 910 + 1) = 16, 715 numbers - just above 0.6% of the original.
  To measure the difference (error) between A and its rank-k approxima- tion A? (k), we need the notion of a norm. In Section 3.1, we already used


  
(a) Original image A.	(b) Rank-1 approximation A? (1).(c) Rank-2 approximation A? (2).

(d) Rank-3 approximation A? (3).(e) Rank-4 approximation A? (4).(f) Rank-5 approximation A? (5).

Figure 4.12 Image reconstruction with the SVD. (a) Original image. (b)-(f) Image reconstruction using the low-rank approximation of the SVD, where the rank-k
approximation is given by A? (k) =



norms on vectors that measure the length of a vector. By analogy we can also define norms on matrices.
Definition 4.23 (Spectral Norm of a Matrix). For x ? Rn\{0}, the spectral	spectral norm
norm of a matrix A ? Rm×n is defined as
?A?  := max ?Ax?2 .	(4.93)
x	?x?2

  We introduce the notation of a subscript in the matrix norm (left-hand side), similar to the Euclidean norm for vectors (right-hand side), which has subscript 2. The spectral norm (4.93) determines how long any vector x can at most become when multiplied by A.
Theorem 4.24. The spectral norm of A is its largest singular value s1.
We leave the proof of this theorem as an exercise.
Theorem 4.25 (Eckart-Young Theorem (Eckart and Young, 1936)). Con- sider a matrix A ? Rm×n of rank r and let B ? Rm×n be a matrix of rank










Eckart-Young theorem

k. For any k ? r with A? (k) =  k	s u v? it holds that
1	A? (k) = argminrk(B)=k ?A - B?2 ,	(4.94)
A - A(k) 2 = sk+1 .	(4.95)
  The Eckart-Young theorem states explicitly how much error we intro- duce by approximating A using a rank-k approximation. We can inter- pret the rank-k approximation obtained with the SVD as a projection of the full-rank matrix A onto a lower-dimensional space of rank-at-most-k matrices. Of all possible projections, the SVD minimizes the error (with respect to the spectral norm) between A and any rank-k approximation.
We can retrace some of the steps to understand why (4.95) should hold.


We observe that the difference between A	A(k) is a matrix containing the sum of the remaining rank-1 matrices
r

A - A? (k) =

i=Lk+1

siuivi? .	(4.96)

By Theorem 4.24, we immediately obtain sk+1 as the spectral norm of the difference matrix. Let us have a closer look at (4.94). If we assume that there is another matrix B with rk(B) ? k, such that
?A - B?2 <  A - A(k) 2 ,	(4.97)
then there exists an at least (n - k)-dimensional null space Z ? Rn, such that x ? Z implies that Bx = 0. Then it follows that
?Ax?2 = ?(A - B)x?2 ,	(4.98)
and by using a version of the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality (3.17) that en- compasses norms of matrices, we obtain
              ?Ax?2 ? ?A - B?2 ?x?2 < sk+1 ?x?2 .	(4.99) However, there exists a (k + 1)-dimensional subspace where Ax 2 ?
sk+1 x 2, which is spanned by the right-singular vectors vj, j ? k + 1 of
A. Adding up dimensions of these two spaces yields a number greater than
n, as there must be a nonzero vector in both spaces. This is a contradiction of the rank-nullity theorem (Theorem 2.24) in Section 2.7.3.
The Eckart-Young theorem implies that we can use SVD to reduce a
rank-r matrix A to a rank-k matrix A? in a principled, optimal (in the
spectral norm sense) manner. We can interpret the approximation of A by a rank-k matrix as a form of lossy compression. Therefore, the low-rank approximation of a matrix appears in many machine learning applications, e.g., image processing, noise filtering, and regularization of ill-posed prob- lems. Furthermore, it plays a key role in dimensionality reduction and principal component analysis, as we will see in Chapter 10.


4.7 Matrix Phylogeny	133

0.4943  0.4372  0.1215
0.5302  0.4689  0.1303
=	0.0692  0.0612  0.0170	.
0.1116  0.0987  0.0274
This first rank-1 approximation A1 is insightful: it tells us that Ali and Beatrix like science fiction movies, such as Star Wars and Bladerunner (entries have values > 0.4), but fails to capture the ratings of the other movies by Chandra. This is not surprising, as Chandra's type of movies is not captured by the first singular value. The second singular value gives us a better rank-1 approximation for those movie-theme lovers:
? 0.0236 ?
A = u v? = ? 0.2054 ? [0.0852  0.1762  -0.9807]	(4.101a)

2	2 2

-0.7705
-0.6030

0.0020	0.0042	-0.0231
0.0175	0.0362	-0.2014
-0.0656  -0.1358	0.7556
-0.0514  -0.1063	0.5914
In this second rank-1 approximation A2, we capture Chandra's ratings and movie types well, but not the science fiction movies. This leads us to consider the rank-2 approximation A(2), where we combine the first two rank-1 approximations

A? (2) = s1A1



+ s2A2

4.7801	4.2419	1.0244
5.2252	4.7522	0.0250
0.2493	0.2743	4.9724
0.7495	0.2756	4.0278

A(2) is similar to the original movie ratings table
?5  4  1?
0  0  5
1  0  4
and this suggests that we can ignore the contribution of A3. We can in- terpret this so that in the data table there is no evidence of a third movie- theme/movie-lovers category. This also means that the entire space of movie-themes/movie-lovers in our example is a two-dimensional space spanned by science fiction and French art house movies and lovers.


Figure 4.13 A functional phylogeny of matrices encountered in machine learning.
























4.7 Matrix Phylogeny
In Chapters 2 and 3, we covered the basics of linear algebra and analytic geometry. In this chapter, we looked at fundamental characteristics of ma- trices and linear mappings. Figure 4.13 depicts the phylogenetic tree of relationships between different types of matrices (black arrows indicating "is a subset of") and the covered operations we can perform on them (in blue). We consider all real matrices A Rn×m. For non-square matrices (where n = m), the SVD always exists, as we saw in this chapter. Focus- ing on square matrices A Rn×n, the determinant informs us whether a square matrix possesses an inverse matrix, i.e., whether it belongs to the class of regular, invertible matrices. If the square n  n matrix possesses n linearly independent eigenvectors, then the matrix is non-defective and an eigendecomposition exists (Theorem 4.12). We know that repeated eigen- values may result in defective matrices, which cannot be diagonalized.
  Non-singular and non-defective matrices are not the same. For exam- ple, a rotation matrix will be invertible (determinant is nonzero) but not diagonalizable in the real numbers (eigenvalues are not guaranteed to be real numbers).


The word "phylogenetic" describes how we capture the relationships among individuals or groups and derived from the Greek words for "tribe" and "source".

4.8 Further Reading	135
  We dive further into the branch of non-defective square n  n matrices. A is normal if the condition A?A = AA? holds. Moreover, if the more restrictive condition holds that A?A = AA? = I, then A is called or- thogonal (see Definition 3.8). The set of orthogonal matrices is a subset of the regular (invertible) matrices and satisfies A? = A-1.
  Normal matrices have a frequently encountered subset, the symmetric matrices S  Rn×n, which satisfy S = S?. Symmetric matrices have only real eigenvalues. A subset of the symmetric matrices consists of the pos- itive definite matrices P that satisfy the condition of x?Px > 0 for all x Rn 0 . In this case, a unique Cholesky decomposition exists (Theo- rem 4.18). Positive definite matrices have only positive eigenvalues and are always invertible (i.e., have a nonzero determinant).
Another subset of symmetric matrices consists of the diagonal matrices
D. Diagonal matrices are closed under multiplication and addition, but do not necessarily form a group (this is only the case if all diagonal entries are nonzero so that the matrix is invertible). A special diagonal matrix is the identity matrix I.

4.8 Further Reading
Most of the content in this chapter establishes underlying mathematics and connects them to methods for studying mappings, many of which are at the heart of machine learning at the level of underpinning software so- lutions and building blocks for almost all machine learning theory. Matrix characterization using determinants, eigenspectra, and eigenspaces pro- vides fundamental features and conditions for categorizing and analyzing matrices. This extends to all forms of representations of data and map- pings involving data, as well as judging the numerical stability of compu- tational operations on such matrices (Press et al., 2007).
  Determinants are fundamental tools in order to invert matrices and compute eigenvalues "by hand". However, for almost all but the smallest instances, numerical computation by Gaussian elimination outperforms determinants (Press et al., 2007). Determinants remain nevertheless a powerful theoretical concept, e.g., to gain intuition about the orientation of a basis based on the sign of the determinant. Eigenvectors can be used to perform basis changes to transform data into the coordinates of mean- ingful orthogonal, feature vectors. Similarly, matrix decomposition meth- ods, such as the Cholesky decomposition, reappear often when we com- pute or simulate random events (Rubinstein and Kroese, 2016). Therefore, the Cholesky decomposition enables us to compute the reparametrization trick where we want to perform continuous differentiation over random variables, e.g., in variational autoencoders (Jimenez Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma and Welling, 2014).
Eigendecomposition is fundamental in enabling us to extract mean-
ingful and interpretable information that characterizes linear mappings.







principal component

Therefore, the eigendecomposition underlies a general class of machine learning algorithms called spectral methods that perform eigendecomposi- tion of a positive-definite kernel. These spectral decomposition methods encompass classical approaches to statistical data analysis, such as the following:

analysis	Principal component analysis (PCA (Pearson, 1901), see also Chapter 10), in which a low-dimensional subspace, which explains most of the vari-

Fisher discriminant

ability in the data, is sought.

analysis	Fisher discriminant analysis, which aims to determine a separating hy-

multidimensional

perplane for data classification (Mika et al., 1999).

scaling	Multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Carroll and Chang, 1970).
The computational efficiency of these methods typically comes from find- ing the best rank-k approximation to a symmetric, positive semidefinite matrix. More contemporary examples of spectral methods have different origins, but each of them requires the computation of the eigenvectors

Isomap
Laplacian eigenmaps
Hessian eigenmaps spectral clustering

















Tucker

and eigenvalues of a positive-definite kernel, such as Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), Laplacian eigenmaps (Belkin and Niyogi, 2003), Hessian eigenmaps (Donoho and Grimes, 2003), and spectral clustering (Shi and Malik, 2000). The core computations of these are generally underpinned by low-rank matrix approximation techniques (Belabbas and Wolfe, 2009) as we encountered here via the SVD.
  The SVD allows us to discover some of the same kind of information as the eigendecomposition. However, the SVD is more generally applicable to non-square matrices and data tables. These matrix factorization meth- ods become relevant whenever we want to identify heterogeneity in data when we want to perform data compression by approximation, e.g., in- stead of storing n m values just storing (n+m)k values, or when we want to perform data pre-processing, e.g., to decorrelate predictor variables of a design matrix (Ormoneit et al., 2001). The SVD operates on matrices, which we can interpret as rectangular arrays with two indices (rows and columns). The extension of matrix-like structure to higher-dimensional arrays are called tensors. It turns out that the SVD is the special case of a more general family of decompositions that operate on such tensors (Kolda and Bader, 2009). SVD-like operations and low-rank approxima- tions on tensors are, for example, the Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966)

decomposition	or the CP decomposition (Carroll and Chang, 1970).
CP decomposition		The SVD low-rank approximation is frequently used in machine learn- ing for computational efficiency reasons. This is because it reduces the amount of memory and operations with nonzero multiplications we need to perform on potentially very large matrices of data (Trefethen and Bau III, 1997). Moreover, low-rank approximations are used to operate on ma- trices that may contain missing values as well as for purposes of lossy compression and dimensionality reduction (Moonen and De Moor, 1995; Markovsky, 2011).

Exercises	137
Exercises
4.1 Compute the determinant using the Laplace expansion (using the first row) and the Sarrus rule for
? 1  3  5 ?
0  2  4
4.2 Compute the following determinant efficiently:
2	0	1	2	0
2	-1  0	1	1
0	1	2	1	2  .

2	0	0	1	1
4.3 Compute the eigenspaces of a.



b.


4.4 Compute all eigenspaces of

A :=  1  0
1  1


B :=  -2  2
2	1


? 0	-1	1	1?

-1	1	-2  3
2	-1	0	0
1	-1	1	0
4.5 Diagonalizability of a matrix is unrelated to its invertibility. Determine for the following four matrices whether they are diagonalizable and/or invert- ible
(1  0l ,	(1  0l ,	(1  1l ,	(0  1l .

4.6 Compute the eigenspaces of the following transformation matrices. Are they diagonalizable?
a. For




b. For

?2  3  0?
0  0  1


1  1  0  0
A =  0  0  0  0
0  0  0  0


4.7 Are the following matrices diagonalizable? If yes, determine their diagonal form and a basis with respect to which the transformation matrices are di- agonal. If no, give reasons why they are not diagonalizable.
a.
A =	0	1
-8  4
b.
?1  1  1?
1  1  1
c. 
5	4	2	1
0	1	-1  -1
-1  -1	3	0
1	1	-1	2
d. 
? 5	-6  -6?
3	-6  -4

4.8 Find the SVD of the matrix


A =  3  2	2	.
2  3  -2

4.9 Find the singular value decomposition of
A =	2	2 .
-1  1
4.10 Find the rank-1 approximation of
A =  3  2	2
2  3  -2
4.11 Show that for any A	Rm×n the matrices A?A and AA? possess the same nonzero eigenvalues.
4.12 Show that for x ?= 0 Theorem 4.24 holds, i.e., show that
max ?Ax?2 = s ,
x	?x?2
where s1 is the largest singular value of A ? Rm×n.




5


Vector Calculus




Many algorithms in machine learning optimize an objective function with respect to a set of desired model parameters that control how well a model explains the data: Finding good parameters can be phrased as an opti- mization problem (see Sections 8.2 and 8.3). Examples include: (i) lin- ear regression (see Chapter 9), where we look at curve-fitting problems and optimize linear weight parameters to maximize the likelihood; (ii) neural-network auto-encoders for dimensionality reduction and data com- pression, where the parameters are the weights and biases of each layer, and where we minimize a reconstruction error by repeated application of the chain rule; and (iii) Gaussian mixture models (see Chapter 11) for modeling data distributions, where we optimize the location and shape parameters of each mixture component to maximize the likelihood of the model. Figure 5.1 illustrates some of these problems, which we typically solve by using optimization algorithms that exploit gradient information (Section 7.1). Figure 5.2 gives an overview of how concepts in this chap- ter are related and how they are connected to other chapters of the book.

  Central to this chapter is the concept of a function. A function f is a quantity that relates two quantities to each other. In this book, these quantities are typically inputs x RD and targets (function values) f (x), which we assume are real-valued if not stated otherwise. Here RD is the
domain of f , and the function values f (x) are the image/codomain of f .  domain
image/codomain


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

10


5


0


-5

-10 10	-5	0	5	10

Figure 5.1 Vector calculus plays a central role in (a) regression (curve fitting) and (b) density estimation, i.e., modeling data distributions.

x	-	x1

(a) Regression problem: Find parameters, such that the curve explains the observations (crosses) well.
(b) 
Density estimation with a Gaussian mixture model: Find means and covariances, such that the data (dots) can be explained well.


139
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Figure 5.2 A mind map of the concepts introduced in this chapter, along with when they are used in other parts of the book.















Section 2.7.3 provides much more detailed discussion in the context of linear functions. We often write
f : RD ? R	(5.1a)
x 1? f (x)	(5.1b)
to specify a function, where (5.1a) specifies that f is a mapping from RD to R and (5.1b) specifies the explicit assignment of an input x to a function value f (x). A function f assigns every input x exactly one function value f (x).


  In this chapter, we will discuss how to compute gradients of functions, which is often essential to facilitate learning in machine learning models since the gradient points in the direction of steepest ascent. Therefore,




y







f (x0)


f (x)




f (x0 + dx) dy
dx

Figure 5.3 The average incline of a function f between x0 and x0 + dx is the incline of the secant (blue) through f (x0) and f (x0 + dx) and given by dy/dx.


x

vector calculus is one of the fundamental mathematical tools we need in machine learning. Throughout this book, we assume that functions are differentiable. With some additional technical definitions, which we do not cover here, many of the approaches presented can be extended to sub-differentials (functions that are continuous but not differentiable at certain points). We will look at an extension to the case of functions with constraints in Chapter 7.

5.1 Differentiation of Univariate Functions
In the following, we briefly revisit differentiation of a univariate function, which may be familiar from high school mathematics. We start with the difference quotient of a univariate function y = f (x), x, y  R, which we will subsequently use to define derivatives.
Definition 5.1 (Difference Quotient). The difference quotient	difference quotient

dy := f (x + dx) - f (x)


(5.3)

dx	dx
computes the slope of the secant line through two points on the graph of
f . In Figure 5.3, these are the points with x-coordinates x0 and x0 + dx.
  The difference quotient can also be considered the average slope of f between x and x + dx if we assume f to be a linear function. In the limit for dx  0, we obtain the tangent of f at x, if f is differentiable. The tangent is then the derivative of f at x.
Definition 5.2 (Derivative). More formally, for h > 0 the derivative of f  derivative
at x is defined as the limit
df := lim f (x + h) - f (x) ,	(5.4)
dx	h?0	h
and the secant in Figure 5.3 becomes a tangent.
The derivative of f points in the direction of steepest ascent of f .












Taylor polynomial We define t0 := 1
for all t ? R.
5.1.1 
Taylor Series
The Taylor series is a representation of a function f as an infinite sum of terms. These terms are determined using derivatives of f evaluated at x0.
Definition 5.3 (Taylor Polynomial). The Taylor polynomial of degree n of
f : R ? R at x0 is defined as

n	(k)
T (x) := L f	(x0)(x - x )k ,	(5.7)








Taylor series

where f (k)(x0) is the kth derivative of f at x0 (which we assume exists) and f(k)(x0 ) are the coefficients of the polynomial.
Definition 5.4 (Taylor Series). For a smooth function f	8, f : R	R, the Taylor series of f at x0 is defined as

8	(k)
T (x) = L f	(x0)(x - x )k .	(5.8)

For x0 = 0, we obtain the Maclaurin series as a special instance of the	f ? C8 means that

Taylor series. If f (x) = T8(x), then f is called analytic.
Remark. In general, a Taylor polynomial of degree n is an approximation of a function, which does not need to be a polynomial. The Taylor poly- nomial is similar to f in a neighborhood around x0. However, a Taylor polynomial of degree n is an exact representation of a polynomial f of degree k ? n since all derivatives f (i), i > k vanish.	?

f is continuously differentiable infinitely many times.
Maclaurin series analytic











f (1) = 1(5.10)f '(1) = 4(5.11)f ''(1) = 12(5.12)f (3)(1) = 24(5.13)f (4)(1) = 24(5.14)f (5)(1) = 0(5.15)f (6)(1) = 0(5.16)


Figure 5.4 Taylor polynomials. The original function f (x) =
sin(x) + cos(x) (black, solid) is approximated by Taylor polynomials (dashed) around x0 = 0.
Higher-order Taylor polynomials approximate the function f better and more globally. T10 is already similar to f in
[-4, 4].




4


2


0


-2

-4	-2	0	2	4




power series representation









Remark. A Taylor series is a special case of a power series
8
f (x) =	ak(x - c)k	(5.28)
k=0
where ak are coefficients and c is a constant, which has the special form in Definition 5.4.	?

5.1.2 Differentiation Rules
In the following, we briefly state basic differentiation rules, where we denote the derivative of f by f '.

Product rule:	(f (x)g(x))' = f '(x)g(x) + f (x)g'(x)	(5.29)

Quotient rule:	( f (x) i' = f '(x)g(x) - f (x)g'(x)


(5.30)

Sum rule:	(f (x) + g(x))' = f '(x) + g'(x)	(5.31)
    Chain rule:	g(f (x)) ' = (g ? f )'(x) = g'(f (x))f '(x)	(5.32) Here, g ? f denotes function composition x 1? f (x) 1? g(f (x)).



















partial derivative
5.2 
Partial Differentiation and Gradients
Differentiation as discussed in Section 5.1 applies to functions f of a scalar variable x R. In the following, we consider the general case where the function f depends on one or more variables x  Rn, e.g., f (x) = f (x1, x2). The generalization of the derivative to functions of sev- eral variables is the gradient.
  We find the gradient of the function f with respect to x by varying one variable at a time and keeping the others constant. The gradient is then the collection of these partial derivatives.
Definition 5.5 (Partial Derivative). For a function f : Rn ? R, x 1?
f (x), x ? Rn of n variables x1, . . . , xn we define the partial derivatives as

?f = lim f (x1 + h, x2, . . . , xn) - f (x)

?x1	h?0	h
.


(5.39)

?f = lim f (x1, . . . , xn-1, xn + h) - f (x)
?xn	h?0	h
and collect them in the row vector

df
f = gradf =
dx

=  ?f (x)
?x1

?f (x)
?x2

· · ·	?f (x) l ? R1×n , (5.40)




gradient

where n is the number of variables and 1 is the dimension of the image/ range/codomain of f . Here, we defined the column vector x = [x1, . . . , xn]?
? Rn. The row vector in (5.40) is called the gradient of f or the Jacobian

Jacobian	and is the generalization of the derivative from Section 5.1.
Remark. This definition of the Jacobian is a special case of the general definition of the Jacobian for vector-valued functions as the collection of

We can use results from scalar differentiation: Each partial derivative is a derivative with respect to a scalar.

partial derivatives. We will get back to this in Section 5.3.	?




Remark (Gradient as a Row Vector). It is not uncommon in the literature to define the gradient vector as a column vector, following the conven- tion that vectors are generally column vectors. The reason why we define the gradient vector as a row vector is twofold: First, we can consistently generalize the gradient to vector-valued functions f : Rn  Rm (then the gradient becomes a matrix). Second, we can immediately apply the multi-variate chain rule without paying attention to the dimension of the gradient. We will discuss both points in Section 5.3.	?





5.2.1 Basic Rules of Partial Differentiation
In the multivariate case, where x  Rn, the basic differentiation rules that we know from school (e.g., sum rule, product rule, chain rule; see also Section 5.1.2) still apply. However, when we compute derivatives with re- spect to vectors x ? Rn we need to pay attention: Our gradients now


Product rule:
(fg)' = f 'g + fg', Sum rule:
(f + g)' = f ' + g', Chain rule:
(g(f ))' = g'(f )f '

involve vectors and matrices, and matrix multiplication is not commuta- tive (Section 2.2.1), i.e., the order matters.
Here are the general product rule, sum rule, and chain rule:

Product rule:	 ?

(f (x)g(x)) = ?f g(x) + f (x) ?g


(5.46)

Sum rule:	?
?x

f (x) + g(x)  = ?f + ?g
?x	?x


(5.47)

Chain rule:	 ?
?x

 ?
(g ? f )(x) = ?x

g(f (x)) = ?g ?f
?f ?x


(5.48)



This is only an intuition, but not mathematically correct since the partial derivative is not a fraction.

Let us have a closer look at the chain rule. The chain rule (5.48) resem- bles to some degree the rules for matrix multiplication where we said that neighboring dimensions have to match for matrix multiplication to be de- fined; see Section 2.2.1. If we go from left to right, the chain rule exhibits similar properties: ?f shows up in the "denominator" of the first factor and in the "numerator" of the second factor. If we multiply the factors to- gether, multiplication is defined, i.e., the dimensions of ?f match, and ?f "cancels", such that ?g/?x remains.


5.2.2 Chain Rule
Consider a function f : R2  R of two variables x1, x2. Furthermore, x1(t) and x2(t) are themselves functions of t. To compute the gradient of f with respect to t, we need to apply the chain rule (5.48) for multivariate functions as

df = I ?f


?f  ?x1 (t) 


?f ?x1 +



?f ?x2




,	(5.49)

dt	?x1

?x2

?x2(t)
?t

?x1 ?t

?x2 ?t


where d denotes the gradient and ? partial derivatives.


  If f (x1, x2) is a function of x1 and x2, where x1(s, t) and x2(s, t) are themselves functions of two variables s and t, the chain rule yields the partial derivatives


?f	?f
=

?x1 + ?f

?x2 ,	(5.51)

?s	?x1 ?s	?x2 ?s

?f	?f
=

?x1 + ?f

?x2 ,	(5.52)

?t	?x1 ?t	?x2 ?t

and the gradient is obtained by the matrix multiplication


df	?f	?x
=

= I ?f

?x1
?f	?? ?s

?x1


?t ?? .	(5.53)

..	= ..?,,f


	
  	  
.. =  ..?,,x	..

?(s, t)
This compact way of writing the chain rule as a matrix multiplication only	The chain rule can

makes sense if the gradient is defined as a row vector. Otherwise, we will need to start transposing gradients for the matrix dimensions to match. This may still be straightforward as long as the gradient is a vector or a matrix; however, when the gradient becomes a tensor (we will discuss this in the following), the transpose is no longer a triviality.
Remark (Verifying the Correctness of a Gradient Implementation). The definition of the partial derivatives as the limit of the corresponding dif- ference quotient (see (5.39)) can be exploited when numerically checking

be written as a matrix multiplication.

the correctness of gradients in computer programs: When we compute  Gradient checking
gradients and implement them, we can use finite differences to numer- ically test our computation and implementation: We choose the value h to be small (e.g., h = 10-4) and compare the finite-difference approxima- tion from (5.39) with our (analytic) implementation of the gradient. If the error is small, our gradient implementation is probably correct. "Small"
could mean that l Li(dhi-dfi)2 < 10-6, where dh is the finite-difference
i
approximation and dfi is the analytic gradient of f with respect to the ith variable xi.	?

5.3 Gradients of Vector-Valued Functions
Thus far, we discussed partial derivatives and gradients of functions f : Rn R mapping to the real numbers. In the following, we will generalize the concept of the gradient to vector-valued functions (vector fields) f : Rn  Rm, where n ? 1 and m > 1.
  For a function f : Rn  Rm and a vector x = [x1, . . . , xn]?  Rn, the corresponding vector of function values is given as


f (x) = ??

.
.
fm(x)

?? ? Rm

.	(5.54)

Writing the vector-valued function in this way allows us to view a vector- valued function f : Rn   Rm as a vector of functions [f1, . . . , fm]?, fi : Rn  R that map onto R. The differentiation rules for every fi are exactly the ones we discussed in Section 5.2.

Therefore, the partial derivative of a vector-valued function f : Rn ?
Rm with respect to xi ? R, i = 1, . . . n, is given as the vector

? ?f1 ?

? lim

f1(x1 ,...,xi-1 ,xi+h,xi+1 ,...xn)-f1(x)  ?

?f	?xi
=	.

?? = ??

h?0	.	h
.

?? ? Rm .

?xi

?fm
?xi

limh?0


fm(x1 ,...,xi-1 ,xi+h,xi+1 ,...xn)-fm(x) h


(5.55)

From (5.40), we know that the gradient of f with respect to a vector is the row vector of the partial derivatives. In (5.55), every partial derivative
?f /?xi is itself a column vector. Therefore, we obtain the gradient of f :
Rn ? Rm with respect to x ? Rn by collecting these partial derivatives:

df (x) = dx

· · ·

l	(5.56a)

= ???

· · ·

· · ·

?? ? Rm×n .	(5.56b)








Jacobian
The gradient of a function

Definition 5.6 (Jacobian). The collection of all first-order partial deriva- tives of a vector-valued function f : Rn ? Rm is called the Jacobian. The Jacobian J is an m × n matrix, which we define and arrange as follows:

f : Rn ? Rm is a

J = ?

f = df (x) = ( ?f (x)

· · ·	?f (x) l	(5.57)

m × n.

? ?f1(x)

?f1(x) ?

?x1	· · ·
=	.
?

?xn
.


,	(5.58)
?

?fm(x)
?x1
?x1 ?

· · ·	?fm(x) ?
?f

x = ?? . ?? ,	J(i, j) =



i .	(5.59)
?xj





numerator layout

that is a row vector (matrix of dimension 1 × n); see (5.40).
Remark. In this book, we use the numerator layout of the derivative, i.e., the derivative df /dx of f	Rm with respect to x	Rn is an m
n matrix, where the elements of f define the rows and the elements of
x define the columns of the corresponding Jacobian; see (5.58). There


Figure 5.5 The determinant of the Jacobian of f can
b2	be used to compute
the magnifier
b1	between the blue
and orange area.

exists also the denominator layout, which is the transpose of the numerator	denominator layout
layout. In this book, we will use the numerator layout.	?
  We will see how the Jacobian is used in the change-of-variable method for probability distributions in Section 6.7. The amount of scaling due to the transformation of a variable is provided by the determinant.
  In Section 4.1, we saw that the determinant can be used to compute the area of a parallelogram. If we are given two vectors b1 = [1, 0]?, b2 = [0, 1]? as the sides of the unit square (blue; see Figure 5.5), the area of this square is
det	1  0	= 1 .	(5.60)
0  1
If we take a parallelogram with the sides c1 = [ 2, 1]?, c2 = [1, 1]? (orange in Figure 5.5), its area is given as the absolute value of the deter- minant (see Section 4.1)
det	2  1	=	3 = 3 ,	(5.61)
1	1
i.e., the area of this is exactly three times the area of the unit square. We can find this scaling factor by finding a mapping that transforms the unit square into the other square. In linear algebra terms, we effectively perform a variable transformation from (b1, b2) to (c1, c2). In our case, the mapping is linear and the absolute value of the determinant of this mapping gives us exactly the scaling factor we are looking for.
  We will describe two approaches to identify this mapping. First, we ex- ploit that the mapping is linear so that we can use the tools from Chapter 2 to identify this mapping. Second, we will find the mapping using partial derivatives using the tools we have been discussing in this chapter.
  Approach 1	To get started with the linear algebra approach, we identify both b1, b2 and c1, c2 as bases of R2 (see Section 2.6.1 for a recap). What we effectively perform is a change of basis from (b1, b2) to (c1, c2), and we are looking for the transformation matrix that implements the basis change. Using results from Section 2.7.2, we identify the desired basis change matrix as
J = (-2  1l ,	(5.62)
such that Jb1 = c1 and Jb2 = c2. The absolute value of the determi-

nant of J, which yields the scaling factor we are looking for, is given as det(J) = 3, i.e., the area of the square spanned by (c1, c2) is three times greater than the area spanned by (b1, b2).
  Approach 2	The linear algebra approach works for linear trans- formations; for nonlinear transformations (which become relevant in Sec- tion 6.7), we follow a more general approach using partial derivatives.
  For this approach, we consider a function f : R2  R2 that performs a variable transformation. In our example, f maps the coordinate represen- tation of any vector x R2 with respect to (b1, b2) onto the coordinate representation y R2 with respect to (c1, c2). We want to identify the mapping so that we can compute how an area (or volume) changes when it is being transformed by f . For this, we need to find out how f (x) changes if we modify x a bit. This question is exactly answered by the

Jacobian matrix df

? R2×2. Since we can write
y1 = -2x1 + x2	(5.63)
y2 = x1 + x2	(5.64)

we obtain the functional relationship between x and y, which allows us to get the partial derivatives

?y1
?x1

=	2 ,	?y1
?x2

= 1 ,	?y2
?x1

= 1 ,	?y2
?x2


= 1	(5.65)

and compose the Jacobian as
?y1


?y2


?x1


?y1


?y2


?x2



2  1  .	(5.66)
1	1

Geometrically, the Jacobian determinant gives the magnification/ scaling factor when we transform an area or volume.
Jacobian determinant


Figure 5.6 Dimensionality of (partial) derivatives.
x
f (x)
?f
?x

The Jacobian represents the coordinate transformation we are looking for. It is exact if the coordinate transformation is linear (as in our case), and (5.66) recovers exactly the basis change matrix in (5.62). If the co- ordinate transformation is nonlinear, the Jacobian approximates this non- linear transformation locally with a linear one. The absolute value of the Jacobian determinant det(J) is the factor by which areas or volumes are scaled when coordinates are transformed. Our case yields det(J) = 3.
  The Jacobian determinant and variable transformations will become relevant in Section 6.7 when we transform random variables and prob- ability distributions. These transformations are extremely relevant in ma- chine learning in the context of training deep neural networks using the reparametrization trick, also called infinite perturbation analysis.
  In this chapter, we encountered derivatives of functions. Figure 5.6 sum- marizes the dimensions of those derivatives. If f : R ? R the gradient is simply a scalar (top-left entry). For f : RD ? R the gradient is a 1 × D row vector (top-right entry). For f : R ? RE, the gradient is an E × 1 column vector, and for f : RD ? RE the gradient is an E × D matrix.








We will discuss this model in much more detail in Chapter 9 in the context of linear regression, where we need derivatives of the least-squares loss L with respect to the parameters ?.


least-squares loss

Example 5.11 (Gradient of a Least-Squares Loss in a Linear Model)
Let us consider the linear model
y = F? ,	(5.75)
where ? ? RD is a parameter vector, F ? RN×D are input features and
y ? RN are the corresponding observations. We define the functions
L(e) := ?e?2 ,	(5.76)
e(?) := y - F? .	(5.77)
We seek ?L , and we will use the chain rule for this purpose. L is called a
least-squares loss function.
  Before we start our calculation, we determine the dimensionality of the gradient as

?L	R1×D .	(5.78)
??
The chain rule allows us to compute the gradient as

?L	?L ?e
=
??	?e ??


,	(5.79)

dLdtheta = np.einsum( 'n,nd', dLde,dedtheta)

where the dth element is given by
?L [1, d] = L ?L [n] ?e [n, d] .	(5.80)


We know that ?e?2 = e?e (see Section 3.2) and determine
?L = 2e?	R1×N .	(5.81)
?e

Furthermore, we obtain


?e =	F	RN×D ,	(5.82)
??

such that our desired derivative is

?L = -	?


(5.77)

?	?  ?

1×D

R	.	(5.83)
2e F =  - 2(y  - ? F )	F,,.. ?

Remark. We would have obtained the same result without using the chain rule by immediately looking at the function
L2(?) := ?y - F??2 = (y - F?)?(y - F?) .	(5.84)
This approach is still practical for simple functions like L2 but becomes impractical for deep function compositions.	?

A ? R4×2	x ? R3
	

Partial derivatives:


?A












?A


?x3






? R4×2







? R4×2×3

Figure 5.7 Visualization of gradient computation of a matrix with respect to a vector. We are interested in computing the gradient of
A	R4×2 with respect to a vector

?x2
?A	R4×2
?x1


4


2

? R4×2

dx
collate

x	R3. We know that gradient
dA	R4 2 3
dx
follow two
equivalent approaches to arrive there: (a) collating partial derivatives into a Jacobian tensor;

(a) Approach 1: We compute the partial derivative
?A , ?A , ?A , each of which is a 4	2 matrix, and col-
?x1  ?x2  ?x3
late them in a 4 × 2 × 3 tensor.

A ? R4×2	x ? R3
x1 x2 x3
(b) 
flattening of the
matrix into a vector, computing the Jacobian matrix,
re-shaping into a Jacobian tensor.




A ? R4×2

re-shape


A˜ ? R8

gradient


dA˜	R8×3
dx


dA	R4×2×3
dx







(b) Approach 2: We re-shape (flatten) A ? R4×2 into a vec-

tor A˜ ? R8. Then, we compute the gradient dA˜

? R8×3.

We obtain the gradient tensor by re-shaping this gradient as illustrated above.



5.4 Gradients of Matrices	We can think of a

We will encounter situations where we need to take gradients of matrices with respect to vectors (or other matrices), which results in a multidimen- sional tensor. We can think of this tensor as a multidimensional array that

tensor as a multidimensional array.













Matrices can be transformed into vectors by stacking the columns of the matrix ("flattening").

collects partial derivatives. For example, if we compute the gradient of an m n matrix A with respect to a p q matrix B, the resulting Jacobian would be (m n) (p q), i.e., a four-dimensional tensor J, whose entries are given as Jijkl = ?Aij/?Bkl.
  Since matrices represent linear mappings, we can exploit the fact that there is a vector-space isomorphism (linear, invertible mapping) between the space Rm×n of m n matrices and the space Rmn of mn vectors. Therefore, we can re-shape our matrices into vectors of lengths mn and pq, respectively. The gradient using these mn vectors results in a Jacobian of size mn pq. Figure 5.7 visualizes both approaches. In practical ap- plications, it is often desirable to re-shape the matrix into a vector and continue working with this Jacobian matrix: The chain rule (5.48) boils down to simple matrix multiplication, whereas in the case of a Jacobian tensor, we will need to pay more attention to what dimensions we need to sum out.











5.5 Useful Identities for Computing Gradients
In the following, we list some useful gradients that are frequently required in a machine learning context (Petersen and Pedersen, 2012). Here, we use tr( ) as the trace (see Definition 4.4), det( ) as the determinant (see Section 4.1) and f (X)-1 as the inverse of f (X), assuming it exists.
 ?  f (X)? =	?f (X)  ?	(5.99)
?X	?X
 ?  tr(f (X)) = tr	?f (X)	(5.100)
?X	?X
 ?  det(f (X)) = det(f (X))tr  f (X)-1 ?f (X)	(5.101)
?X	?X
 ?  f (X)-1 =	f (X)-1 ?f (X) f (X)-1	(5.102)
?X	?X

?a?X-1b


?X

= -(X-1)?ab?(X-1)?	(5.103)

?x?a = a?	(5.104)
?x
?a?x = a?	(5.105)
?x
?a?Xb = ab?	(5.106)
?X
?x?Bx = x?(B + B?)	(5.107)
?x
? (x - As)?W (x - As) = -2(x - As)?WA	for symmetric W
(5.108)
Remark. In this book, we only cover traces and transposes of matrices. However, we have seen that derivatives can be higher-dimensional ten- sors, in which case the usual trace and transpose are not defined. In these cases, the trace of a D D E F tensor would be an E F -dimensional matrix. This is a special case of a tensor contraction. Similarly, when we

"transpose" a tensor, we mean swapping the first two dimensions. Specif- ically, in (5.99) through (5.102), we require tensor-related computations when we work with multivariate functions f ( ) and compute derivatives with respect to matrices (and choose not to vectorize them as discussed in Section 5.4).	?


5.6 Backpropagation and Automatic Differentiation
In many machine learning applications, we find good model parameters by performing gradient descent (Section 7.1), which relies on the fact that we can compute the gradient of a learning objective with respect to the parameters of the model. For a given objective function, we can obtain the gradient with respect to the model parameters using calculus and applying the chain rule; see Section 5.2.2. We already had a taste in Section 5.3 when we looked at the gradient of a squared loss with respect to the parameters of a linear regression model.
Consider the function

      f (x) =	x2 + exp(x2) + cos x2 + exp(x2) .	(5.109)
By application of the chain rule, and noting that differentiation is linear, we compute the gradient
2


A good discussion about backpropagation and the chain rule is available at a blog by Tim Vieira at https://tinyurl. com/ycfm2yrw.

df	2x + 2x exp(x )	( 2	2 ) (	2 )

dx = 2?x2 + exp(x2) - sin x

+ exp(x )

2x + 2x exp(x )

= 2x (

1
2?x2 + exp(x2)

- sin x2 + exp(x2)   1 + exp(x2) .
(5.110)

Writing out the gradient in this explicit way is often impractical since it often results in a very lengthy expression for a derivative. In practice, it means that, if we are not careful, the implementation of the gradient could be significantly more expensive than computing the function, which imposes unnecessary overhead. For training deep neural network mod-
els, the backpropagation algorithm (Kelley, 1960; Bryson, 1961; Dreyfus,	backpropagation
1962; Rumelhart et al., 1986) is an efficient way to compute the gradient of an error function with respect to the parameters of the model.

5.6.1 Gradients in a Deep Network
An area where the chain rule is used to an extreme is deep learning, where the function value y is computed as a many-level function composition
  y = (fK ? fK-1 ? · · · ? f1)(x) = fK(fK-1(· · · (f1(x)) · · · )) ,	(5.111)
where x are the inputs (e.g., images), y are the observations (e.g., class labels), and every function fi, i = 1, . . . , K, possesses its own parameters.



Figure 5.8 Forward pass in a multi-layer neural network to compute the loss L as a function of the inputs x and the parameters Ai, bi.








A0, b0








A1, b1






AK-2, bK-2






AK-1, bK-1



We discuss the case, where the activation functions are identical in each layer to unclutter notation.


















A more in-depth discussion about
 
In neural networks with multiple layers, we have functions fi(xi-1) = s(Ai-1xi-1 + bi-1) in the ith layer. Here xi-1 is the output of layer i  1 and s an activation function, such as the logistic sigmoid  1  , tanh or a rectified linear unit (ReLU). In order to train these models, we require the gradient of a loss function L with respect to all model parameters Aj, bj for j = 1, . . . , K. This also requires us to compute the gradient of L with respect to the inputs of each layer. For example, if we have inputs x and observations y and a network structure defined by
f 0 := x	(5.112)
f i := si(Ai-1f i-1 + bi-1) ,	i = 1, . . . , K ,	(5.113)
see also Figure 5.8 for a visualization, we may be interested in finding
Aj, bj for j = 0, . . . , K - 1, such that the squared loss
                    L(?) = ?y - f (?, x)?2	(5.114) is minimized, where ? = A0, b0, . . . , AK-1, bK-1 .
To obtain the gradients with respect to the parameter set ?, we require
the partial derivatives of L with respect to the parameters ?j = Aj, bj of each layer j = 0, . . . , K	1. The chain rule allows us to determine the partial derivatives as

gradients of neural

?L	?L
=

?f K

(5.115)

networks can be found in Justin Domke's lecture notes https://tinyurl.


??K-1
?L


??K-2


?f K ??K-1
=



(5.116)

com/yalcxgtv.

?L	?L
=

?f K

(5.117)

??K-3

?f K ?f K-1

?L	 ?L
=

?f K

· · ·


(5.118)

??i

?f K ?f K-1


The orange terms are partial derivatives of the output of a layer with respect to its inputs, whereas the blue terms are partial derivatives of the output of a layer with respect to its parameters. Assuming, we have already computed the partial derivatives ?L/??i+1, then most of the com- putation can be reused to compute ?L/??i. The additional terms that we










A0, b0








A1, b1






AK-2, bK-2






AK-1, bK-1

Figure 5.9 Backward pass in a multi-layer neural network to compute the gradients of the loss function.


Figure 5.10 Simple graph illustrating the flow of data from x to y via

need to compute are indicated by the boxes. Figure 5.9 visualizes that the
gradients are passed backward through the network.

some intermediate variables a, b.



5.6.2 Automatic Differentiation
It turns out that backpropagation is a special case of a general technique
in numerical analysis called automatic differentiation. We can think of au-	automatic

tomatic differentation as a set of techniques to numerically (in contrast to symbolically) evaluate the exact (up to machine precision) gradient of a function by working with intermediate variables and applying the chain

differentiation

rule. Automatic differentiation applies a series of elementary arithmetic	Automatic

operations, e.g., addition and multiplication and elementary functions, e.g., sin, cos, exp, log. By applying the chain rule to these operations, the gradient of quite complicated functions can be computed automatically. Automatic differentiation applies to general computer programs and has forward and reverse modes. Baydin et al. (2018) give a great overview of automatic differentiation in machine learning.
  Figure 5.10 shows a simple graph representing the data flow from in- puts x to outputs y via some intermediate variables a, b. If we were to compute the derivative dy/dx, we would apply the chain rule and obtain

differentiation is different from symbolic differentiation and numerical approximations of the gradient, e.g., by using finite differences.

dy	dy db da
=
dx	db da dx


.	(5.119)

Intuitively, the forward and reverse mode differ in the order of multipli-	In the general case,

cation. Due to the associativity of matrix multiplication, we can choose between
dy = ( dy db i da ,	(5.120)

we work with Jacobians, which can be vectors, matrices, or tensors.

dy = dy ( db da i .	(5.121)

Equation (5.120) would be the reverse mode because gradients are prop-	reverse mode
agated backward through the graph, i.e., reverse to the data flow. Equa-
tion (5.121) would be the forward mode, where the gradients flow with	forward mode
the data from left to right through the graph.

  In the following, we will focus on reverse mode automatic differentia- tion, which is backpropagation. In the context of neural networks, where the input dimensionality is often much higher than the dimensionality of the labels, the reverse mode is computationally significantly cheaper than the forward mode. Let us start with an instructive example.









intermediate variables

Example 5.14
Consider the function
      f (x) =	x2 + exp(x2) + cos x2 + exp(x2)	(5.122)
from (5.109). If we were to implement a function f on a computer, we would be able to save some computation by using intermediate variables:











Figure 5.11 Computation graph with inputs x, function values f , and intermediate variables a, b, c, d, e.


x	(·)2	a

exp(·)	b

v·	d
+	c	+	f

cos(·)	e


  This is the same kind of thinking process that occurs when applying the chain rule. Note that the preceding set of equations requires fewer operations than a direct implementation of the function f (x) as defined in (5.109). The corresponding computation graph in Figure 5.11 shows the flow of data and computations required to obtain the function value f .
  The set of equations that include intermediate variables can be thought of as a computation graph, a representation that is widely used in imple- mentations of neural network software libraries. We can directly compute the derivatives of the intermediate variables with respect to their corre- sponding inputs by recalling the definition of the derivative of elementary functions. We obtain the following:
?a
= 2x	(5.129)
?x
?b = exp(a)	(5.130)
?a




  Automatic differentiation is a formalization of Example 5.14. Let x1, . . . , xd be the input variables to the function, xd+1, . . . , xD-1 be the intermediate variables, and xD the output variable. Then the computation graph can be expressed as follows:

For i = d + 1, . . . , D :	xi = gi(xPa(xi)) ,	(5.143)

where the gi( ) are elementary functions and xPa(xi) are the parent nodes of the variable xi in the graph. Given a function defined in this way, we can use the chain rule to compute the derivative of the function in a step- by-step fashion. Recall that by definition f = xD and hence
?f



?xD

= 1 .	(5.144)

For other variables xi, we apply the chain rule

?f
?xi


=
xj :xi?Pa(xj )

?f ?xj
?xj ?xi


=
xj :xi?Pa(xj )

?f ?gj ,	(5.145)
?xj ?xi



Auto-differentiation in reverse mode requires a parse tree.

where Pa(xj) is the set of parent nodes of xj in the computation graph. Equation (5.143) is the forward propagation of a function, whereas (5.145) is the backpropagation of the gradient through the computation graph. For neural network training, we backpropagate the error of the prediction with respect to the label.
  The automatic differentiation approach above works whenever we have a function that can be expressed as a computation graph, where the ele- mentary functions are differentiable. In fact, the function may not even be a mathematical function but a computer program. However, not all com- puter programs can be automatically differentiated, e.g., if we cannot find differential elementary functions. Programming structures, such as for loops and if statements, require more care as well.

5.7 Higher-Order Derivatives
So far, we have discussed gradients, i.e., first-order derivatives. Some- times, we are interested in derivatives of higher order, e.g., when we want to use Newton's Method for optimization, which requires second-order derivatives (Nocedal and Wright, 2006). In Section 5.1.1, we discussed the Taylor series to approximate functions using polynomials. In the mul- tivariate case, we can do exactly the same. In the following, we will do exactly this. But let us start with some notation.
  Consider a function f : R2 R of two variables x, y. We use the following notation for higher-order partial derivatives (and for gradients):
?2 f is the second partial derivative of f with respect to x.
?nf is the nth partial derivative of f with respect to x.

?2f

?y?x

? ( ?f ) is the partial derivative obtained by first partial differ-

entiating with respect to x and then with respect to y.

?2f

?x?y

is the partial derivative obtained by first partial differentiating by



Hessian

y and then x.
The Hessian is the collection of all second-order partial derivatives.






1


0


-1

-2
-4	-2	0	2	4

Figure 5.12 Linear approximation of a function. The original function f is linearized at
x0 = 2 using a first-order Taylor series expansion.



If f (x, y) is a twice (continuously) differentiable function, then

?2f


?x?y

?2f
=
?y?x


,	(5.146)

i.e., the order of differentiation does not matter, and the corresponding
Hessian matrix	Hessian matrix
? ?2f	?2f  ?
	

H = ?

?x2

?x?y


(5.147)

is symmetric. The Hessian is denoted as ?2  f (x, y). Generally, for x ? Rn
and f : Rn  R, the Hessian is an n n matrix. The Hessian measures the curvature of the function locally around (x, y).
Remark (Hessian of a Vector Field). If f : Rn ? Rm is a vector field, the Hessian is an (m × n × n)-tensor.	?

5.8 Linearization and Multivariate Taylor Series
The gradient f of a function f is often used for a locally linear approxi- mation of f around x0:
          f (x) ˜ f (x0) + (?xf )(x0)(x - x0) .	(5.148)
Here ( xf )(x0) is the gradient of f with respect to x, evaluated at x0. Figure 5.12 illustrates the linear approximation of a function f at an input x0. The original function is approximated by a straight line. This approx- imation is locally accurate, but the farther we move away from x0 the worse the approximation gets. Equation (5.148) is a special case of a mul- tivariate Taylor series expansion of f at x0, where we consider only the first two terms. We discuss the more general case in the following, which will allow for better approximations.



Figure 5.13 Visualizing outer products. Outer products of vectors increase the dimensionality of the array by 1 per term. (a) The outer product of two vectors results in a matrix; (b) the outer product of three vectors yields a third-order tensor.














multivariate Taylor series


		
(a) Given a vector d ? R4, we obtain the outer product d2 := d ? d = dd? ?
R4×4 as a matrix.


(b) An outer product d3 := d	d	d	R4×4×4 results in a third-order tensor ("three- dimensional matrix"), i.e., an array with three indexes.


Definition 5.7 (Multivariate Taylor Series). We consider a function
f : RD ? R	(5.149)
x 1? f (x) ,	x ? RD ,	(5.150)
that is smooth at x0. When we define the difference vector d := x	x0, the multivariate Taylor series of f at (x0) is defined as

8	k
f (x) =	Dxf (x0) dk ,	(5.151)
k!






Taylor polynomial

k=0

where Dkf (x0) is the k-th (total) derivative of f with respect to x, eval- uated at x0.
Definition 5.8 (Taylor Polynomial). The Taylor polynomial of degree n of f at x0 contains the first n + 1 components of the series in (5.151) and is defined as

n	k
T (x) =	Dxf (x0) dk .	(5.152)
n	k!
k=0




A vector can be implemented as a one-dimensional array, a matrix as a two-dimensional array.
  
In (5.151) and (5.152), we used the slightly sloppy notation of dk, which is not defined for vectors x  RD, D > 1, and k > 1. Note that both Dkf and dk are k-th order tensors, i.e., k-dimensional arrays. The
k times

kth-order tensor dk ? R D×D×...×D is obtained as a k-fold outer product, denoted by ?, of the vector d ? RD. For example,
d2 := d ? d = dd? ,	d2[i, j] = d[i]d[j]	(5.153)

         d3 := d ? d ? d ,	d3[i, j, k] = d[i]d[j]d[k] .	(5.154)
Figure 5.13 visualizes two such outer products. In general, we obtain the terms
D	D
Dkf (x0)dk = L · · · L Dkf (x0)[i1, . . . , ik]d[i1] · · · d[ik]	(5.155)

in the Taylor series, where Dkf (x0)dk contains k-th order polynomials.
  Now that we defined the Taylor series for vector fields, let us explicitly write down the first terms Dkf (x0)dk of the Taylor series expansion for
k = 0, . . . , 3 and d := x - x0:	np.einsum(

k = 0 : D0 f (x0)d0 = f (x0) ? R	(5.156)
k = 1 : D1 f (x )d1 = ? f (x )  d  = L ? f (x )[i]d[i] ? R (5.157)

'i,i',Df1,d)
np.einsum( 'ij,i,j',

  ..D..×,,1..
k = 2 : D2 f (x )d2 = tr( H(x )  d

	
i=1
d? ) = d?H(x )d	(5.158)


np.einsum( 'ijk,i,j,k',

x	0	.. ..,, 0.. ....,,.. ....,,..	0
	 

Df3,d,d,d)

=	H[i, j]d[i]d[j]	R	(5.159)
i=1 j=1
D	D	D

x	x
i=1 j=1 k=1
(5.160)
Here, H(x0) is the Hessian of f evaluated at x0.






The third-order derivatives are obtained as


3
x,y

f = I ?H

?H  ? R2×2×2 ,	(5.174)


3
x,y


3
x,y

?H
f [:, :, 1] =	=
?x
?H
f [:, :, 2] =	=
?y

?3f
?x3
?3f
?x?y?x
?3f
?y?x2
?3f
?y2 ?x

?3f
?x2 ?y
?3f
?x?y2
?3f
?y?x?y
?3f
?y3


,	(5.175)

.	(5.176)

Since most second-order partial derivatives in the Hessian in (5.171) are constant, the only nonzero third-order partial derivative is

?3f
?y3 = 6 =?

?3f
(1, 2) = 6 .	(5.177)
?y3

Higher-order derivatives and the mixed derivatives of degree 3 (e.g.,

?f 3
?x2 ?y

) vanish, such that

D3 f [:, :, 1] = (0  0l ,	D3 f [:, :, 2] = (0  0l	(5.178)


and

x,y

0  0	x,y	0  6

D3 f (1, 2)
  x,y	 d3 = (y	2)3 ,	(5.179)
3!
which collects all cubic terms of the Taylor series. Overall, the (exact) Taylor series expansion of f at (x0, y0) = (1, 2) is
D2 f (1, 2)	D3 f (1, 2)

f (x) = f (1, 2) + D1

f (1, 2)d +   x,y	 d2 +   x,y	 d3



= f (1, 2) +

x,y


?f (1, 2)
?x	(x - 1) +

2!	3!

?f (1, 2)
?y	(y - 2)


(5.180a)

1 ( ?2f (1, 2)

2	?2f (1, 2)	2

?2f (1, 2)

i	1 ?3f (1, 2)	3

= 13 + 6(x - 1) + 14(y - 2)
+ (x - 1)2 + 6(y - 2)2 + 2(x - 1)(y - 2) + (y - 2)3 . (5.180c)
In this case, we obtained an exact Taylor series expansion of the polyno- mial in (5.161), i.e., the polynomial in (5.180c) is identical to the original polynomial in (5.161). In this particular example, this result is not sur- prising since the original function was a third-order polynomial, which we expressed through a linear combination of constant terms, first-order, second-order, and third-order polynomials in (5.180c).






















extended Kalman
5.9 
Further Reading
Further details of matrix differentials, along with a short review of the required linear algebra, can be found in Magnus and Neudecker (2007). Automatic differentiation has had a long history, and we refer to Griewank and Walther (2003), Griewank and Walther (2008), and Elliott (2009) and the references therein.
  In machine learning (and other disciplines), we often need to compute expectations, i.e., we need to solve integrals of the form
                   Ex[f (x)] = - f (x)p(x)dx .	(5.181)
Even if p(x) is in a convenient form (e.g., Gaussian), this integral gen- erally cannot be solved analytically. The Taylor series expansion of f is one way of finding an approximate solution: Assuming p(x) =	µ, S is Gaussian, then the first-order Taylor series expansion around µ locally linearizes the nonlinear function f . For linear functions, we can compute the mean (and the covariance) exactly if p(x) is Gaussian distributed (see Section 6.5). This property is heavily exploited by the extended Kalman

filter	filter (Maybeck, 1979) for online state estimation in nonlinear dynami- cal systems (also called "state-space models"). Other deterministic ways

unscented transform Laplace

to approximate the integral in (5.181) are the unscented transform (Julier and Uhlmann, 1997), which does not require any gradients, or the Laplace

approximation	approximation (MacKay, 2003; Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012), which uses
a second-order Taylor series expansion (requiring the Hessian) for a local Gaussian approximation of p(x) around its mode.

Exercises
5.1 Compute the derivative f'(x) for
f(x) = log(x4) sin(x3) .
5.2 Compute the derivative f'(x) of the logistic sigmoid
f(x) =	1	.
1 + exp(-x)
5.3 Compute the derivative f'(x) of the function
f(x) = exp(-  1  (x - µ)2) ,
where µ, s ? R are constants.
5.4 Compute the Taylor polynomials Tn, n = 0, . . . , 5 of f(x) = sin(x) + cos(x)
at x0 = 0.
5.5 Consider the following functions:
f1(x) = sin(x1) cos(x2) ,	x ? R2 f2(x, y) = x?y ,	 x, y ? Rn f3(x) = xx? ,	x ? Rn

Exercises	171
a. What are the dimensions of ?fi ?
b. Compute the Jacobians.
5.6 Differentiate f with respect to t and g with respect to X, where
f(t) = sin(log(t?t)) ,	t ? RD
g(X) = tr(AXB) ,	A ? RD×E, X ? RE×F , B ? RF ×D ,
where tr( ) denotes the trace.
5.7 Compute the derivatives df/dx of the following functions by using the chain rule. Provide the dimensions of every single partial derivative. Describe your steps in detail.
a.
f(z) = log(1 + z) ,	z = x?x ,	x ? RD
b.
f(z) = sin(z) ,	z = Ax + b ,	A ? RE×D, x ? RD, b ? RE
where sin(·) is applied to every element of z.
5.8 Compute the derivatives df/dx of the following functions. Describe your steps in detail.
a. Use the chain rule. Provide the dimensions of every single partial deriva- tive.
f(z) = exp(- 1 z)
z = g(y) = y?S-1y y = h(x) = x - µ
where x, µ	RD, S	RD×D.
b. 
f(x) = tr(xx? + s2I) ,	x ? RD
Here tr(A) is the trace of A, i.e., the sum of the diagonal elements Aii.
Hint: Explicitly write out the outer product.
c. Use the chain rule. Provide the dimensions of every single partial deriva- tive. You do not need to compute the product of the partial derivatives explicitly.
f = tanh(z) ? RM
z = Ax + b,	x ? RN , A ? RM×N , b ? RM .
Here, tanh is applied to every component of z.
5.9 We define
g(x, z, ?) := log p(x, z) - log q(z, ?)
z := t(?, ?)
for differentiable functions p, q, t and x	RD, z	RE, ?	RF , ?	RG. By using the chain rule, compute the gradient
d g(x, z, ?) .
d?




6


Probability and Distributions













random variable




probability

Probability, loosely speaking, concerns the study of uncertainty. Probabil- ity can be thought of as the fraction of times an event occurs, or as a degree of belief about an event. We then would like to use this probability to mea- sure the chance of something occurring in an experiment. As mentioned in Chapter 1, we often quantify uncertainty in the data, uncertainty in the machine learning model, and uncertainty in the predictions produced by the model. Quantifying uncertainty requires the idea of a random variable, which is a function that maps outcomes of random experiments to a set of properties that we are interested in. Associated with the random variable is a function that measures the probability that a particular outcome (or set of outcomes) will occur; this is called the probability distribution.

distribution		Probability distributions are used as a building block for other con- cepts, such as probabilistic modeling (Section 8.4), graphical models (Sec- tion 8.5), and model selection (Section 8.6). In the next section, we present the three concepts that define a probability space (the sample space, the events, and the probability of an event) and how they are related to a fourth concept called the random variable. The presentation is deliber- ately slightly hand wavy since a rigorous presentation may occlude the intuition behind the concepts. An outline of the concepts presented in this chapter are shown in Figure 6.1.

6.1 Construction of a Probability Space
The theory of probability aims at defining a mathematical structure to describe random outcomes of experiments. For example, when tossing a single coin, we cannot determine the outcome, but by doing a large num- ber of coin tosses, we can observe a regularity in the average outcome. Using this mathematical structure of probability, the goal is to perform automated reasoning, and in this sense, probability generalizes logical reasoning (Jaynes, 2003).

6.1.1 Philosophical Issues
When constructing automated reasoning systems, classical Boolean logic does not allow us to express certain forms of plausible reasoning. Consider
172
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Figure 6.1 A mind map of the concepts related to random variables and probability distributions, as described in this chapter.
















the following scenario: We observe that A is false. We find B becomes less plausible, although no conclusion can be drawn from classical logic. We observe that B is true. It seems A becomes more plausible. We use this form of reasoning daily. We are waiting for a friend, and consider three possibilities: H1, she is on time; H2, she has been delayed by traffic; and H3, she has been abducted by aliens. When we observe our friend is late, we must logically rule out H1. We also tend to consider H2 to be more likely, though we are not logically required to do so. Finally, we may consider H3 to be possible, but we continue to consider it quite unlikely.
How do we conclude H2 is the most plausible answer? Seen in this way,  "For plausible

probability theory can be considered a generalization of Boolean logic. In the context of machine learning, it is often applied in this way to formalize the design of automated reasoning systems. Further arguments about how probability theory is the foundation of reasoning systems can be found in Pearl (1988).
  The philosophical basis of probability and how it should be somehow related to what we think should be true (in the logical sense) was studied by Cox (Jaynes, 2003). Another way to think about it is that if we are precise about our common sense we end up constructing probabilities.
E. T. Jaynes (1922-1998) identified three mathematical criteria, which must apply to all plausibilities:
1. The degrees of plausibility are represented by real numbers.
2. These numbers must be based on the rules of common sense.

reasoning it is necessary to extend the discrete true and false values of truth to continuous plausibilities" (Jaynes, 2003).

3. The resulting reasoning must be consistent, with the three following meanings of the word "consistent":
(a) Consistency or non-contradiction: When the same result can be reached through different means, the same plausibility value must be found in all cases.
(b) Honesty: All available data must be taken into account.
(c) Reproducibility: If our state of knowledge about two problems are the same, then we must assign the same degree of plausibility to both of them.
  The Cox-Jaynes theorem proves these plausibilities to be sufficient to define the universal mathematical rules that apply to plausibility p, up to transformation by an arbitrary monotonic function. Crucially, these rules are the rules of probability.
Remark. In machine learning and statistics, there are two major interpre- tations of probability: the Bayesian and frequentist interpretations (Bishop, 2006; Efron and Hastie, 2016). The Bayesian interpretation uses probabil- ity to specify the degree of uncertainty that the user has about an event. It is sometimes referred to as "subjective probability" or "degree of belief". The frequentist interpretation considers the relative frequencies of events of interest to the total number of events that occurred. The probability of an event is defined as the relative frequency of the event in the limit when one has infinite data.	?
  Some machine learning texts on probabilistic models use lazy notation and jargon, which is confusing. This text is no exception. Multiple distinct concepts are all referred to as "probability distribution", and the reader has to often disentangle the meaning from the context. One trick to help make sense of probability distributions is to check whether we are trying to model something categorical (a discrete random variable) or some- thing continuous (a continuous random variable). The kinds of questions we tackle in machine learning are closely related to whether we are con- sidering categorical or continuous models.

6.1.2 Probability and Random Variables
There are three distinct ideas that are often confused when discussing probabilities. First is the idea of a probability space, which allows us to quantify the idea of a probability. However, we mostly do not work directly with this basic probability space. Instead, we work with random variables (the second idea), which transfers the probability to a more convenient (often numerical) space. The third idea is the idea of a distribution or law associated with a random variable. We will introduce the first two ideas in this section and expand on the third idea in Section 6.2.
Modern probability is based on a set of axioms proposed by Kolmogorov

(Grinstead and Snell, 1997; Jaynes, 2003) that introduce the three con- cepts of sample space, event space, and probability measure. The prob- ability space models a real-world process (referred to as an experiment) with random outcomes.
The sample space ?
The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes of the experiment,  sample space
usually denoted by ?. For example, two successive coin tosses have a sample space of hh, tt, ht, th , where "h" denotes "heads" and "t" denotes "tails".
The event space
The event space is the space of potential results of the experiment. A event space
subset A of the sample space ? is in the event space  if at the end of the experiment we can observe whether a particular outcome ? ? is in A. The event space is obtained by considering the collection of subsets of ?, and for discrete probability distributions (Section 6.2.1) A is often the power set of ?.
The probability P
With each event A	, we associate a number P (A) that measures the probability or degree of belief that the event will occur. P (A) is called
the probability of A.	probability
  The probability of a single event must lie in the interval [0, 1], and the total probability over all outcomes in the sample space ? must be 1, i.e., P (?) = 1. Given a probability space (?, , P ), we want to use it to model some real-world phenomenon. In machine learning, we often avoid explic- itly referring to the probability space, but instead refer to probabilities on quantities of interest, which we denote by . In this book, we refer to
as the target space and refer to elements of	as states. We introduce a	target space
function X : ?	that takes an element of ? (an outcome) and returns a particular quantity of interest x, a value in	. This association/mapping
from ? to	is called a random variable. For example, in the case of tossing	random variable
two coins and counting the number of heads, a random variable X maps to the three possible outcomes: X(hh) = 2, X(ht) = 1, X(th) = 1, and X(tt) = 0. In this particular case, T = {0, 1, 2}, and it is the probabilities
on elements of T that we are interested in. For a finite sample space ? and	The name "random

finite , the function corresponding to a random variable is essentially a lookup table. For any subset S  , we associate PX(S) [0, 1] (the probability) to a particular event occurring corresponding to the random variable X. Example 6.1 provides a concrete illustration of the terminol- ogy.
Remark. The aforementioned sample space ? unfortunately is referred to by different names in different books. Another common name for ? is "state space" (Jacod and Protter, 2004), but state space is sometimes reserved for referring to states in a dynamical system (Hasselblatt and

variable" is a great source of misunderstanding as it is neither random nor is it a variable. It is a function.







This toy example is essentially a biased coin flip example.

Katok, 2003). Other names sometimes used to describe ? are: "sample description space", "possibility space," and "event space".	?
Example 6.1
We assume that the reader is already familiar with computing probabilities of intersections and unions of sets of events. A gentler introduction to probability with many examples can be found in chapter 2 of Walpole et al. (2011).
  Consider a statistical experiment where we model a funfair game con- sisting of drawing two coins from a bag (with replacement). There are coins from USA (denoted as $) and UK (denoted as £) in the bag, and since we draw two coins from the bag, there are four outcomes in total. The state space or sample space ? of this experiment is then ($, $), ($,
£), (£, $), (£, £). Let us assume that the composition of the bag of coins is such that a draw returns at random a $ with probability 0.3.
  The event we are interested in is the total number of times the repeated draw returns $. Let us define a random variable X that maps the sample space ? to , which denotes the number of times we draw $ out of the bag. We can see from the preceding sample space we can get zero $, one $, or two $s, and therefore = 0, 1, 2 . The random variable X (a function or lookup table) can be represented as a table like the following:

X(($, $)) = 2(6.1)X(($, £)) = 1(6.2)X((£, $)) = 1(6.3)X((£, £)) = 0 .(6.4)Since we return the first coin we draw before drawing the second, this implies that the two draws are independent of each other, which we will discuss in Section 6.4.5. Note that there are two experimental outcomes, which map to the same event, where only one of the draws returns $. Therefore, the probability mass function (Section 6.2.1) of X is given by
P (X = 2) = P (($, $))
= P ($) · P ($)
= 0.3 · 0.3 = 0.09	(6.5)
P (X = 1) = P (($, £) ? (£, $))
= P (($, £)) + P ((£, $))
= 0.3 · (1 - 0.3) + (1 - 0.3) · 0.3 = 0.42	(6.6)
P (X = 0) = P ((£, £))
= P (£) · P (£)
= (1 - 0.3) · (1 - 0.3) = 0.49 .	(6.7)

  In the calculation, we equated two different concepts, the probability of the output of X and the probability of the samples in ?. For example, in (6.7) we say P (X = 0) = P ((£, £)). Consider the random variable
X : ?	and a subset S	(for example, a single element of  ,
such as the outcome that one head is obtained when tossing two coins). Let X-1(S) be the pre-image of S by X, i.e., the set of elements of ? that map to S under X; ? ? : X(?) S . One way to understand the transformation of probability from events in ? via the random variable X is to associate it with the probability of the pre-image of S (Jacod and Protter, 2004). For S ? T , we have the notation
PX(S) = P (X ? S) = P (X-1(S)) = P ({? ? ? : X(?) ? S}) .	(6.8)
The left-hand side of (6.8) is the probability of the set of possible outcomes (e.g., number of $ = 1) that we are interested in. Via the random variable X, which maps states to outcomes, we see in the right-hand side of (6.8) that this is the probability of the set of states (in ?) that have the property (e.g., $£, £$). We say that a random variable X is distributed according to a particular probability distribution PX, which defines the probability mapping between the event and the probability of the outcome of the random variable. In other words, the function PX or equivalently P  X-1
is the law or distribution of random variable X.	law

Remark. The target space, that is, the range of the random variable X, is used to indicate the kind of probability space, i.e., a  random variable. When is finite or countably infinite, this is called a discrete random variable (Section 6.2.1). For continuous random variables (Section 6.2.2), we only consider T = R or T = RD.	?

6.1.3 Statistics
Probability theory and statistics are often presented together, but they con- cern different aspects of uncertainty. One way of contrasting them is by the kinds of problems that are considered. Using probability, we can consider a model of some process, where the underlying uncertainty is captured by random variables, and we use the rules of probability to derive what happens. In statistics, we observe that something has happened and try to figure out the underlying process that explains the observations. In this sense, machine learning is close to statistics in its goals to construct a model that adequately represents the process that generated the data. We can use the rules of probability to obtain a "best-fitting" model for some data.
  Another aspect of machine learning systems is that we are interested in generalization error (see Chapter 8). This means that we are actually interested in the performance of our system on instances that we will observe in future, which are not identical to the instances that we have

distribution

seen so far. This analysis of future performance relies on probability and statistics, most of which is beyond what will be presented in this chapter. The interested reader is encouraged to look at the books by Boucheron et al. (2013) and Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David (2014). We will see more about statistics in Chapter 8.












probability mass
6.2 
Discrete and Continuous Probabilities
Let us focus our attention on ways to describe the probability of an event as introduced in Section 6.1. Depending on whether the target space is dis- crete or continuous, the natural way to refer to distributions is different. When the target space is discrete, we can specify the probability that a random variable X takes a particular value x  , denoted as P (X = x). The expression P (X = x) for a discrete random variable X is known as the probability mass function. When the target space T is continuous, e.g.,

function	the real line R, it is more natural to specify the probability that a random variable X is in an interval, denoted by P (a ? X ? b) for a < b. By con- vention, we specify the probability that a random variable X is less than a particular value x, denoted by P (X ? x). The expression P (X ? x) for

cumulative

a continuous random variable X is known as the cumulative distribution

distribution function function. We will discuss continuous random variables in Section 6.2.2. We will revisit the nomenclature and contrast discrete and continuous random variables in Section 6.2.3.

univariate


multivariate










joint probability

Remark. We will use the phrase univariate distribution to refer to distribu- tions of a single random variable (whose states are denoted by non-bold x). We will refer to distributions of more than one random variable as multivariate distributions, and will usually consider a vector of random variables (whose states are denoted by bold x).	?

6.2.1 Discrete Probabilities
When the target space is discrete, we can imagine the probability distri- bution of multiple random variables as filling out a (multidimensional) array of numbers. Figure 6.2 shows an example. The target space of the joint probability is the Cartesian product of the target spaces of each of the random variables. We define the joint probability as the entry of both values jointly

P (X = x , Y = y ) = nij ,	(6.9)
i	j	N





probability mass

where nij is the number of events with state xi and yj and N the total number of events. The joint probability is the probability of the intersec- tion of both events, that is, P (X = xi, Y = yj) = P (X = xi  Y = yj). Figure 6.2 illustrates the probability mass function (pmf) of a discrete prob-

function	ability distribution. For two random variables X and Y , the probability





y1
Y	y2 y3

ci





x1	x2	x3	x4	x5 X


}rj

Figure 6.2 Visualization of a discrete bivariate probability mass function, with random variables X and Y . This diagram is adapted from Bishop (2006).


that X = x and Y = y is (lazily) written as p(x, y) and is called the joint probability. One can think of a probability as a function that takes state x and y and returns a real number, which is the reason we write p(x, y).
The marginal probability that X takes the value x irrespective of the value  marginal probability
of random variable Y is (lazily) written as p(x). We write X p(x) to denote that the random variable X is distributed according to p(x). If we consider only the instances where X = x, then the fraction of instances
(the conditional probability) for which Y = y is written (lazily) as p(y x).  conditional
probability








categorical variable





























measure


Borel s-algebra
  
In machine learning, we use discrete probability distributions to model categorical variables, i.e., variables that take a finite set of unordered val- ues. They could be categorical features, such as the degree taken at uni- versity when used for predicting the salary of a person, or categorical la- bels, such as letters of the alphabet when doing handwriting recognition. Discrete distributions are also often used to construct probabilistic models that combine a finite number of continuous distributions (Chapter 11).

6.2.2 Continuous Probabilities
We consider real-valued random variables in this section, i.e., we consider target spaces that are intervals of the real line R. In this book, we pretend that we can perform operations on real random variables as if we have dis- crete probability spaces with finite states. However, this simplification is not precise for two situations: when we repeat something infinitely often, and when we want to draw a point from an interval. The first situation arises when we discuss generalization errors in machine learning (Chap- ter 8). The second situation arises when we want to discuss continuous distributions, such as the Gaussian (Section 6.5). For our purposes, the lack of precision allows for a briefer introduction to probability.
Remark. In continuous spaces, there are two additional technicalities, which are counterintuitive. First, the set of all subsets (used to define the event space  in Section 6.1) is not well behaved enough.  needs to be restricted to behave well under set complements, set intersections, and set unions. Second, the size of a set (which in discrete spaces can be obtained by counting the elements) turns out to be tricky. The size of a set is called its measure. For example, the cardinality of discrete sets, the length of an interval in R, and the volume of a region in Rd are all mea- sures. Sets that behave well under set operations and additionally have a topology are called a Borel s-algebra. Betancourt details a careful con- struction of probability spaces from set theory without being bogged down in technicalities; see https://tinyurl.com/yb3t6mfd. For a more pre- cise construction, we refer to Billingsley (1995) and Jacod and Protter (2004).
In this book, we consider real-valued random variables with their cor-

responding Borel s-algebra. We consider random variables with values in
RD to be a vector of real-valued random variables.	?
Definition 6.1 (Probability Density Function). A function f : RD	R is
called a probability density function (pdf ) if	probability density function

1. x	RD : f (x) ? 0
2. Its integral exists and

-RD



f (x)dx = 1 .	(6.15)

pdf

For probability mass functions (pmf) of discrete random variables, the integral in (6.15) is replaced with a sum (6.12).
  Observe that the probability density function is any function f that is non-negative and integrates to one. We associate a random variable X with this function f by


P (a ? X ? b) =

b
f (x)dx,	(6.16)
a

where a, b ? R and x ? R are outcomes of the continuous random vari- able X. States x ? RD are defined analogously by considering a vector
of x ? R. This association (6.16) is called the law or distribution of the	law
random variable X.	P (X = x) is a set of

Remark. In contrast to discrete random variables, the probability of a con- tinuous random variable X taking a particular value P (X = x) is zero. This is like trying to specify an interval in (6.16) where a = b.	?

measure zero.

Definition 6.2 (Cumulative Distribution Function). A cumulative distribu-	cumulative

tion function (cdf) of a multivariate real-valued random variable X with states x ? RD is given by
FX(x) = P (X1 ? x1, . . . , XD ? xD) ,	(6.17)
where X = [X1, . . . , XD]?, x = [x1, . . . , xD]?, and the right-hand side represents the probability that random variable Xi takes the value smaller than or equal to xi.
  The cdf can be expressed also as the integral of the probability density function f (x) so that

distribution function







There are cdfs, which do not have corresponding pdfs.


FX(x) =

x1
· · ·



xD
f (z1, . . . , zD)dz1 · · · dzD .	(6.18)



Remark. We reiterate that there are in fact two distinct concepts when talking about distributions. First is the idea of a pdf (denoted by f (x)), which is a nonnegative function that sums to one. Second is the law of a random variable X, that is, the association of a random variable X with the pdf f (x).	?

Figure 6.3
Examples of
(a) discrete and
(b) continuous uniform distributions. See Example 6.3 for details of the

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

distributions.	1	0	1	2
z
(a) Discrete distribution

1	0	1	2
x
(b) Continuous distribution



  For most of this book, we will not use the notation f (x) and FX(x) as we mostly do not need to distinguish between the pdf and cdf. However, we will need to be careful about pdfs and cdfs in Section 6.7.











uniform distribution
6.2.3 
Contrasting Discrete and Continuous Distributions
Recall from Section 6.1.2 that probabilities are positive and the total prob- ability sums up to one. For discrete random variables (see (6.12)), this implies that the probability of each state must lie in the interval [0, 1]. However, for continuous random variables the normalization (see (6.15)) does not imply that the value of the density is less than or equal to 1 for all values. We illustrate this in Figure 6.3 using the uniform distribution for both discrete and continuous random variables.








The actual values of
meaningful here, and we deliberately

drive home the point that we do not want to use (and should ignore) the ordering of the states.




Type	"Point probability"	"Interval probability"
Discrete		P(X = x)	Not applicable Probability mass function
Continuous	p(x)	P(X ? x)
Probability density function	Cumulative distribution function

Table 6.1 Nomenclature for probability distributions.






Remark. There is an additional subtlety with regards to discrete prob- ability distributions. The states z1, . . . , zd do not in principle have any structure, i.e., there is usually no way to compare them, for example z1 = red, z2 = green, z3 = blue. However, in many machine learning applications discrete states take numerical values, e.g., z1 = 1.1, z2 = 0.3, z3 = 1.5, where we could say z1 < z2 < z3. Discrete states that as- sume numerical values are particularly useful because we often consider expected values (Section 6.4.1) of random variables.	?
  Unfortunately, machine learning literature uses notation and nomen- clature that hides the distinction between the sample space ?, the target space T , and the random variable X. For a value x of the set of possible
outcomes of the random variable X, i.e., x ? T , p(x) denotes the prob-	We think of the

ability that random variable X has the outcome x. For discrete random variables, this is written as P (X = x), which is known as the probabil- ity mass function. The pmf is often referred to as the "distribution". For continuous variables, p(x) is called the probability density function (often referred to as a density). To muddy things even further, the cumulative distribution function P (X ? x) is often also referred to as the "distribu- tion". In this chapter, we will use the notation X to refer to both univariate and multivariate random variables, and denote the states by x and x re- spectively. We summarize the nomenclature in Table 6.1.
Remark. We will be using the expression "probability distribution" not only for discrete probability mass functions but also for continuous proba- bility density functions, although this is technically incorrect. In line with most machine learning literature, we also rely on context to distinguish the different uses of the phrase probability distribution.	?

6.3 Sum Rule, Product Rule, and Bayes' Theorem
We think of probability theory as an extension to logical reasoning. As we discussed in Section 6.1.1, the rules of probability presented here follow

outcome x as the argument that results in the probability p(x).















These two rules arise
naturally (Jaynes,

naturally from fulfilling the desiderata (Jaynes, 2003, chapter 2). Prob- abilistic modeling (Section 8.4) provides a principled foundation for de- signing machine learning methods. Once we have defined probability dis- tributions (Section 6.2) corresponding to the uncertainties of the data and our problem, it turns out that there are only two fundamental rules, the sum rule and the product rule.
  Recall from (6.9) that p(x, y) is the joint distribution of the two ran- dom variables x, y. The distributions p(x) and p(y) are the correspond- ing marginal distributions, and p(y x) is the conditional distribution of y given x. Given the definitions of the marginal and conditional probability for discrete and continuous random variables in Section 6.2, we can now present the two fundamental rules in probability theory.
The first rule, the sum rule, states that

2003) from the requirements we discussed in Section 6.1.1. sum rule



p(x) =

???
??

p(x, y)	if y is discrete
y?Y	,
p(x, y)dy	if y is continuous
Y



(6.20)




marginalization

where are the states of the target space of random variable Y . This means that we sum out (or integrate out) the set of states y of the random variable Y . The sum rule is also known as the marginalization property.

property	The sum rule relates the joint distribution to a marginal distribution. In general, when the joint distribution contains more than two random vari- ables, the sum rule can be applied to any subset of the random variables, resulting in a marginal distribution of potentially more than one random variable. More concretely, if x = [x1, . . . , xD]?, we obtain the marginal
                p(xi) = - p(x1, . . . , xD)dx\i	(6.21)
by repeated application of the sum rule where we integrate/sum out all random variables except xi, which is indicated by i, which reads "all except i."
Remark. Many of the computational challenges of probabilistic modeling are due to the application of the sum rule. When there are many variables or discrete variables with many states, the sum rule boils down to per- forming a high-dimensional sum or integral. Performing high-dimensional sums or integrals is generally computationally hard, in the sense that there is no known polynomial-time algorithm to calculate them exactly.   ?

product rule
  
The second rule, known as the product rule, relates the joint distribution to the conditional distribution via
                   p(x, y) = p(y | x)p(x) .	(6.22)
The product rule can be interpreted as the fact that every joint distribu- tion of two random variables can be factorized (written as a product)

of two other distributions. The two factors are the marginal distribu- tion of the first random variable p(x), and the conditional distribution of the second random variable given the first p(y x). Since the ordering of random variables is arbitrary in p(x, y), the product rule also implies p(x, y) = p(x y)p(y). To be precise, (6.22) is expressed in terms of the probability mass functions for discrete random variables. For continuous random variables, the product rule is expressed in terms of the probability density functions (Section 6.2.3).
  In machine learning and Bayesian statistics, we are often interested in making inferences of unobserved (latent) random variables given that we have observed other random variables. Let us assume we have some prior knowledge p(x) about an unobserved random variable x and some rela- tionship p(y x) between x and a second random variable y, which we can observe. If we observe y, we can use Bayes' theorem to draw some
conclusions about x given the observed values of y. Bayes' theorem (also  Bayes' theorem
Bayes' rule or Bayes' law)	Bayes' rule

likelihood prior

Bayes' law

p(x | y) = p,,(y....| x..) p,,(..x )


(6.23)

..pos..te,,rior..

p(y)
e..vi..de,,n..ce

is a direct consequence of the product rule in (6.22) since
p(x, y) = p(x | y)p(y)	(6.24)

and


so that


p(x, y) = p(y | x)p(x)	(6.25)

p(x | y)p(y) = p(y | x)p(x) ?? p(x | y) = p(y | x)p(x) .	(6.26)
In (6.23), p(x) is the prior, which encapsulates our subjective prior  prior
knowledge of the unobserved (latent) variable x before observing any data. We can choose any prior that makes sense to us, but it is critical to ensure that the prior has a nonzero pdf (or pmf) on all plausible x, even if they are very rare.
The likelihood p(y | x) describes how x and y are related, and in the  likelihood

case of discrete probability distributions, it is the probability of the data y if we were to know the latent variable x. Note that the likelihood is not a distribution in x, but only in y. We call p(y x) either the "likelihood of x (given y)" or the "probability of y given x" but never the likelihood of y (MacKay, 2003).

The likelihood is sometimes also called the "measurement model".

The posterior p(x y) is the quantity of interest in Bayesian statistics	posterior
because it expresses exactly what we are interested in, i.e., what we know about x after having observed y.

The quantity
p(y) := - p(y | x)p(x)dx = EX[p(y | x)]	(6.27)


marginal likelihood

is the marginal likelihood/evidence. The right-hand side of (6.27) uses the

evidence	expectation operator which we define in Section 6.4.1. By definition, the marginal likelihood integrates the numerator of (6.23) with respect to the latent variable x. Therefore, the marginal likelihood is independent of x, and it ensures that the posterior p(x y) is normalized. The marginal likelihood can also be interpreted as the expected likelihood where we take the expectation with respect to the prior p(x). Beyond normalization of the posterior, the marginal likelihood also plays an important role in Bayesian model selection, as we will discuss in Section 8.6. Due to the

Bayes' theorem is also called the "probabilistic inverse." probabilistic inverse

integration in (8.44), the evidence is often hard to compute.
  Bayes' theorem (6.23) allows us to invert the relationship between x and y given by the likelihood. Therefore, Bayes' theorem is sometimes called the probabilistic inverse. We will discuss Bayes' theorem further in Section 8.4.
Remark. In Bayesian statistics, the posterior distribution is the quantity of interest as it encapsulates all available information from the prior and the data. Instead of carrying the posterior around, it is possible to focus on some statistic of the posterior, such as the maximum of the posterior, which we will discuss in Section 8.3. However, focusing on some statistic of the posterior leads to loss of information. If we think in a bigger con- text, then the posterior can be used within a decision-making system, and having the full posterior can be extremely useful and lead to decisions that are robust to disturbances. For example, in the context of model-based re- inforcement learning, Deisenroth et al. (2015) show that using the full posterior distribution of plausible transition functions leads to very fast (data/sample efficient) learning, whereas focusing on the maximum of the posterior leads to consistent failures. Therefore, having the full pos- terior can be very useful for a downstream task. In Chapter 9, we will continue this discussion in the context of linear regression.	?

6.4 Summary Statistics and Independence
We are often interested in summarizing sets of random variables and com- paring pairs of random variables. A statistic of a random variable is a de- terministic function of that random variable. The summary statistics of a distribution provide one useful view of how a random variable behaves, and as the name suggests, provide numbers that summarize and charac- terize the distribution. We describe the mean and the variance, two well- known summary statistics. Then we discuss two ways to compare a pair of random variables: first, how to say that two random variables are inde- pendent; and second, how to compute an inner product between them.

6.4.1 Means and Covariances
Mean and (co)variance are often useful to describe properties of probabil- ity distributions (expected values and spread). We will see in Section 6.6 that there is a useful family of distributions (called the exponential fam- ily), where the statistics of the random variable capture all possible infor- mation.
  The concept of the expected value is central to machine learning, and the foundational concepts of probability itself can be derived from the expected value (Whittle, 2000).
Definition 6.3 (Expected Value). The expected value of a function g : R ?	expected value
R of a univariate continuous random variable X ~ p(x) is given by

EX[g(x)] =	g(x)p(x)dx.	(6.28)
X
Correspondingly, the expected value of a function g of a discrete random variable X ~ p(x) is given by
EX[g(x)] =	g(x)p(x) ,	(6.29)
x?X
where	is the set of possible outcomes (the target space) of the random variable X.
  In this section, we consider discrete random variables to have numerical outcomes. This can be seen by observing that the function g takes real
numbers as inputs.	The expected value

Remark. We consider multivariate random variables X as a finite vector of univariate random variables [X1, . . . , XD]?. For multivariate random variables, we define the expected value element wise
EX [g(x1)]
EX[g(x)] = ??	.	?? ? RD ,	(6.30)
 

of a function of a random variable is sometimes referred to as the law of the unconscious statistician (Casella and Berger, 2002,
Section 2.2).

where the subscript EX indicates that we are taking the expected value
with respect to the dth element of the vector x.	?
  Definition 6.3 defines the meaning of the notation EX as the operator indicating that we should take the integral with respect to the probabil- ity density (for continuous distributions) or the sum over all states (for discrete distributions). The definition of the mean (Definition 6.4), is a special case of the expected value, obtained by choosing g to be the iden- tity function.
Definition 6.4 (Mean). The mean of a random variable X with states	mean

x ? RD is an average and is defined as
? EX1 [x1] ?



where

EX[x] = ??

.
EXD [xD]

?? ? R

,	(6.31)


E	[x ] :=

??? -


xdp(xd)dxd	if X is a continuous random variable

Xd	d

? LX

xip(xd = xi)  if X is a discrete random variable









median










mode

for d = 1, . . . , D, where the subscript d indicates the corresponding di- mension of x. The integral and sum are over the states of the target space of the random variable X.
  In one dimension, there are two other intuitive notions of "average", which are the median and the mode. The median is the "middle" value if we sort the values, i.e., 50% of the values are greater than the median and 50% are smaller than the median. This idea can be generalized to contin- uous values by considering the value where the cdf (Definition 6.2) is 0.5. For distributions, which are asymmetric or have long tails, the median provides an estimate of a typical value that is closer to human intuition than the mean value. Furthermore, the median is more robust to outliers than the mean. The generalization of the median to higher dimensions is non-trivial as there is no obvious way to "sort" in more than one dimen- sion (Hallin et al., 2010; Kong and Mizera, 2012). The mode is the most frequently occurring value. For a discrete random variable, the mode is defined as the value of x having the highest frequency of occurrence. For a continuous random variable, the mode is defined as a peak in the density
p(x). A particular density p(x) may have more than one mode, and fur- thermore there may be a very large number of modes in high-dimensional distributions. Therefore, finding all the modes of a distribution can be computationally challenging.
















Figure 6.4 Illustration of the mean, mode, and median for a
two-dimensional dataset, as well as its marginal densities.














Remark. The expected value (Definition 6.3) is a linear operator. For ex- ample, given a real-valued function f (x) = ag(x) + bh(x) where a, b ? R and x ? RD, we obtain
EX[f (x)] = - f (x)p(x)dx	(6.34a)
= - [ag(x) + bh(x)]p(x)dx	(6.34b)
= a - g(x)p(x)dx + b - h(x)p(x)dx	(6.34c)
= aEX[g(x)] + bEX[h(x)] .	(6.34d)
?
For two random variables, we may wish to characterize their correspon-





covariance




Terminology: The covariance of multivariate random variables Cov[x, y] is sometimes referred to as
cross-covariance, with covariance referring to Cov[x, x].

variance
standard deviation





covariance









variance

dence to each other. The covariance intuitively represents the notion of how dependent random variables are to one another.
Definition 6.5 (Covariance (Univariate)). The covariance between two univariate random variables X, Y  R is given by the expected product of their deviations from their respective means, i.e.,
CovX,Y [x, y] := EX,Y (x - EX[x])(y - EY [y]) .	(6.35)
Remark. When the random variable associated with the expectation or covariance is clear by its arguments, the subscript is often suppressed (for example, EX[x] is often written as E[x]).	?
  By using the linearity of expectations, the expression in Definition 6.5 can be rewritten as the expected value of the product minus the product of the expected values, i.e.,
Cov[x, y] = E[xy] - E[x]E[y] .	(6.36)
The covariance of a variable with itself Cov[x, x] is called the variance and is denoted by VX[x]. The square root of the variance is called the standard deviation and is often denoted by s(x). The notion of covariance can be generalized to multivariate random variables.
Definition 6.6 (Covariance (Multivariate)). If we consider two multivari- ate random variables X and Y with states x RD and y RE respec- tively, the covariance between X and Y is defined as
Cov[x, y] = E[xy?] - E[x]E[y]? = Cov[y, x]? ? RD×E .	(6.37)
  Definition 6.6 can be applied with the same multivariate random vari- able in both arguments, which results in a useful concept that intuitively captures the "spread" of a random variable. For a multivariate random variable, the variance describes the relation between individual dimen- sions of the random variable.
Definition 6.7 (Variance). The variance of a random variable X with states x ? RD and a mean vector µ ? RD is defined as
VX[x] = CovX[x, x]	(6.38a)
= EX[(x - µ)(x - µ)?] = EX[xx?] - EX[x]EX[x]?	(6.38b)
Cov[x1, x1]	Cov[x1, x2]  . . .	Cov[x1, xD]
Cov[x2, x1]	Cov[x2, x2]  . . .	Cov[x2, xD]

??	.

.	. . .	.

.	(6.38c)
?



covariance matrix


marginal

Cov[xD, x1]	. . .	. . .  Cov[xD, xD]
  The D D matrix in (6.38c) is called the covariance matrix of the mul- tivariate random variable X. The covariance matrix is symmetric and pos- itive semidefinite and tells us something about the spread of the data. On its diagonal, the covariance matrix contains the variances of the marginals


6

4

2

0

-2
5	0	5
x


6

4

2

0

-2
5	0	5
x

Figure 6.5
Two-dimensional datasets with identical means and variances along each axis (colored lines) but with different covariances.

(a) x and y are negatively correlated.	(b) x and y are positively correlated.

                 p(xi) = - p(x1, . . . , xD)dx\i ,	(6.39) where "\i" denotes "all variables but i". The off-diagonal entries are the
cross-covariance terms Cov[xi, xj] for i, j = 1, . . . , D, i ?= j.	cross-covariance
Remark. In this book, we generally assume that covariance matrices are positive definite to enable better intuition. We therefore do not discuss corner cases that result in positive semidefinite (low-rank) covariance ma- trices.	?
  When we want to compare the covariances between different pairs of random variables, it turns out that the variance of each random variable affects the value of the covariance. The normalized version of covariance is called the correlation.
Definition 6.8 (Correlation). The correlation between two random vari-	correlation
ables X, Y is given by


corr

Cov[x, y]


(6.40)

[x, y] =	V[x]V[y] ? [-1, 1] .
  The correlation matrix is the covariance matrix of standardized random variables, x/s(x). In other words, each random variable is divided by its standard deviation (the square root of the variance) in the correlation matrix.
  The covariance (and correlation) indicate how two random variables are related; see Figure 6.5. Positive correlation corr[x, y] means that when x grows, then y is also expected to grow. Negative correlation means that as x increases, then y decreases.

6.4.2 Empirical Means and Covariances
The definitions in Section 6.4.1 are often also called the population mean	population mean

and covariance, as it refers to the true statistics for the population. In ma- chine learning, we need to learn from empirical observations of data. Con- sider a random variable X. There are two conceptual steps to go from

and covariance










empirical mean sample mean
empirical mean

population statistics to the realization of empirical statistics. First, we use the fact that we have a finite dataset (of size N ) to construct an empirical statistic that is a function of a finite number of identical random variables, X1, . . . , XN . Second, we observe the data, that is, we look at the realiza- tion x1, . . . , xN of each of the random variables and apply the empirical statistic.
  Specifically, for the mean (Definition 6.4), given a particular dataset we can obtain an estimate of the mean, which is called the empirical mean or sample mean. The same holds for the empirical covariance.
Definition 6.9 (Empirical Mean and Covariance). The empirical mean vec- tor is the arithmetic average of the observations for each variable, and it is defined as


where xn ? RD.

1
x¯ :=
N

N
xn
n=1

,	(6.41)

empirical covariance

Similar to the empirical mean, the empirical covariance matrix is a D D
matrix




Throughout the

1
S :=
N

N
(xn
n=1

- x¯)(xn

- x¯)?.	(6.42)

book, we use the empirical covariance, which is a biased estimate. The unbiased (sometimes called corrected) covariance has the factor N	1 in the denominator instead of N .
The derivations are exercises at the end of this chapter.
  
To compute the statistics for a particular dataset, we would use the realizations (observations) x1, . . . , xN and use (6.41) and (6.42). Em- pirical covariance matrices are symmetric, positive semidefinite (see Sec- tion 3.2.3).

6.4.3 Three Expressions for the Variance
We now focus on a single random variable X and use the preceding em- pirical formulas to derive three possible expressions for the variance. The following derivation is the same for the population variance, except that we need to take care of integrals. The standard definition of variance, cor- responding to the definition of covariance (Definition 6.5), is the expec- tation of the squared deviation of a random variable X from its expected value µ, i.e.,

VX[x] := EX[(x - µ)2] .	(6.43)
The expectation in (6.43) and the mean µ = EX(x) are computed us- ing (6.32), depending on whether X is a discrete or continuous random variable. The variance as expressed in (6.43) is the mean of a new random variable Z := (X  µ)2.
  When estimating the variance in (6.43) empirically, we need to resort to a two-pass algorithm: one pass through the data to calculate the mean µ using (6.41), and then a second pass using this estimate µˆ calculate the

variance. It turns out that we can avoid two passes by rearranging the
terms. The formula in (6.43) can be converted to the so-called raw-score	raw-score formula

formula for variance:


V [x] = E [x2] - (E [x])2 .	(6.44)

for variance

The expression in (6.44) can be remembered as "the mean of the square minus the square of the mean". It can be calculated empirically in one pass through data since we can accumulate xi (to calculate the mean) and x2
simultaneously, where xi is the ith observation. Unfortunately, if imple-  If the two terms

mented in this way, it can be numerically unstable. The raw-score version of the variance can be useful in machine learning, e.g., when deriving the bias-variance decomposition (Bishop, 2006).
  A third way to understand the variance is that it is a sum of pairwise dif- ferences between all pairs of observations. Consider a sample x1, . . . , xN of realizations of random variable X, and we compute the squared differ- ence between pairs of xi and xj. By expanding the square, we can show

in (6.44) are huge and approximately equal, we may suffer from an unnecessary loss of numerical precision in floating-point arithmetic.

that the sum of N 2 pairwise differences is the empirical variance of the observations:


1


N 2
i,j=1

(x - x )2 = 2 ?? 1

Li=1

x2 -


1
xi
N
i=1

2
? .	(6.45)

We see that (6.45) is twice the raw-score expression (6.44). This means that we can express the sum of pairwise distances (of which there are N 2 of them) as a sum of deviations from the mean (of which there are N ). Ge- ometrically, this means that there is an equivalence between the pairwise distances and the distances from the center of the set of points. From a computational perspective, this means that by computing the mean (N terms in the summation), and then computing the variance (again N terms in the summation), we can obtain an expression (left-hand side of (6.45)) that has N 2 terms.

6.4.4 Sums and Transformations of Random Variables
We may want to model a phenomenon that cannot be well explained by textbook distributions (we introduce some in Sections 6.5 and 6.6), and hence may perform simple manipulations of random variables (such as adding two random variables).
Consider two random variables X, Y with states x, y ? RD. Then:
E[x + y] = E[x] + E[y]	(6.46)
E[x - y] = E[x] - E[y]	(6.47)
V[x + y] = V[x] + V[y] + Cov[x, y] + Cov[y, x]	(6.48)
V[x - y] = V[x] + V[y] - Cov[x, y] - Cov[y, x] .	(6.49)












This can be shown directly by using the definition of the mean and covariance.
  
Mean and (co)variance exhibit some useful properties when it comes to affine transformation of random variables. Consider a random variable X with mean µ and covariance matrix S and a (deterministic) affine transformation y = Ax + b of x. Then y is itself a random variable whose mean vector and covariance matrix are given by
EY [y] = EX[Ax + b] = AEX[x] + b = Aµ + b ,	(6.50)
VY [y] = VX[Ax + b] = VX[Ax] = AVX[x]A? = ASA? ,	(6.51)
respectively. Furthermore,
Cov[x, y] = E[x(Ax + b)?] - E[x]E[Ax + b]?	(6.52a)
= E[x]b? + E[xx?]A? - µb? - µµ?A?	(6.52b)
= µb? - µb? + (E[xx?] - µµ?)A?	(6.52c)

(6.38b)
=	SA

,	(6.52d)

where S = E[xx?] - µµ? is the covariance of X.




statistical
6.4.5 
Statistical Independence
Definition 6.10 (Independence). Two random variables X, Y are statis-

independence	tically independent if and only if
                 p(x, y) = p(x)p(y) .	(6.53)
  Intuitively, two random variables X and Y are independent if the value of y (once known) does not add any additional information about x (and vice versa). If X, Y are (statistically) independent, then
p(y x) = p(y)
p(x y) = p(x)
VX,Y [x + y] = VX[x] + VY [y]
CovX,Y [x, y] = 0
The last point may not hold in converse, i.e., two random variables can have covariance zero but are not statistically independent. To understand why, recall that covariance measures only linear dependence. Therefore, random variables that are nonlinearly dependent could have covariance zero.


In machine learning, we often consider problems that can be mod-
eled as independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables,	independent and

X1, . . . , XN . For more than two random variables, the word "indepen- dent" (Definition 6.10) usually refers to mutually independent random variables, where all subsets are independent (see Pollard (2002, chap- ter 4) and Jacod and Protter (2004, chapter 3)). The phrase "identically distributed" means that all the random variables are from the same distri- bution.
  Another concept that is important in machine learning is conditional independence.
Definition 6.11 (Conditional Independence). Two random variables X

identically distributed i.i.d.

and Y are conditionally independent given Z if and only if	conditionally independent
p(x, y | z) = p(x | z)p(y | z)	for all	z ? Z ,	(6.55)
where is the set of states of random variable Z. We write X Y Z to denote that X is conditionally independent of Y given Z.
  Definition 6.11 requires that the relation in (6.55) must hold true for every value of z. The interpretation of (6.55) can be understood as "given knowledge about z, the distribution of x and y factorizes". Independence can be cast as a special case of conditional independence if we write X
Y . By using the product rule of probability (6.22), we can expand the left-hand side of (6.55) to obtain
                 p(x, y | z) = p(x | y, z)p(y | z) .	(6.56) By comparing the right-hand side of (6.55) with (6.56), we see that p(y z)
appears in both of them so that
                   p(x | y, z) = p(x | z) .	(6.57)
Equation (6.57) provides an alternative definition of conditional indepen- dence, i.e., X Y Z. This alternative presentation provides the inter- pretation "given that we know z, knowledge about y does not change our knowledge of x".

6.4.6 Inner Products of Random Variables
Recall the definition of inner products from Section 3.2. We can define an	Inner products

inner product between random variables, which we briefly describe in this section. If we have two uncorrelated random variables X, Y , then
V[x + y] = V[x] + V[y] .	(6.58)
Since variances are measured in squared units, this looks very much like the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles c2 = a2 + b2.
  In the following, we see whether we can find a geometric interpreta- tion of the variance relation of uncorrelated random variables in (6.58).

between multivariate random variables can be treated in a similar fashion


Figure 6.6 Geometry of random variables. If random variables X and Y are uncorrelated, they are orthogonal vectors in a corresponding vector space, and the Pythagorean theorem applies.


















Cov[x, x] = 0 ??

Random variables can be considered vectors in a vector space, and we can define inner products to obtain geometric properties of random vari- ables (Eaton, 2007). If we define
?X, Y ? := Cov[x, y]	(6.59)
for zero mean random variables X and Y , we obtain an inner product. We see that the covariance is symmetric, positive definite, and linear in either

x = 0	argument. The length of a random variable is
Cov[ax + z, y] =
	

a Cov[x, y] + Cov[z, y] for a ? R.

?X? =	Cov[x, x] =	V[x] = s[x] ,	(6.60)
i.e., its standard deviation. The "longer" the random variable, the more uncertain it is; and a random variable with length 0 is deterministic.
If we look at the angle ? between two random variables X, Y , we get

 ?X, Y ?

Cov[x, y]


(6.61)

cos ? = ?X? ?Y ? =	V[x]V[y] ,
which is the correlation (Definition 6.8) between the two random vari- ables. This means that we can think of correlation as the cosine of the angle between two random variables when we consider them geometri- cally. We know from Definition 3.7 that X Y	X, Y = 0. In our case, this means that X and Y are orthogonal if and only if Cov[x, y] = 0, i.e., they are uncorrelated. Figure 6.6 illustrates this relationship.
Remark. While it is tempting to use the Euclidean distance (constructed







0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Figure 6.7 Gaussian distribution of two
random variables x1
and x2.




-1	0


1	- -

7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5


from the preceding definition of inner products) to compare probability distributions, it is unfortunately not the best way to obtain distances be- tween distributions. Recall that the probability mass (or density) is posi- tive and needs to add up to 1. These constraints mean that distributions live on something called a statistical manifold. The study of this space of probability distributions is called information geometry. Computing dis- tances between distributions are often done using Kullback-Leibler diver- gence, which is a generalization of distances that account for properties of the statistical manifold. Just like the Euclidean distance is a special case of a metric (Section 3.3), the Kullback-Leibler divergence is a special case of two more general classes of divergences called Bregman divergences and f -divergences. The study of divergences is beyond the scope of this book, and we refer for more details to the recent book by Amari (2016), one of the founders of the field of information geometry.	?

6.5 Gaussian Distribution
The Gaussian distribution is the most well-studied probability distribution
for continuous-valued random variables. It is also referred to as the normal	normal distribution
distribution. Its importance originates from the fact that it has many com-	The Gaussian

putationally convenient properties, which we will be discussing in the fol- lowing. In particular, we will use it to define the likelihood and prior for linear regression (Chapter 9), and consider a mixture of Gaussians for density estimation (Chapter 11).
  There are many other areas of machine learning that also benefit from using a Gaussian distribution, for example Gaussian processes, variational inference, and reinforcement learning. It is also widely used in other ap- plication areas such as signal processing (e.g., Kalman filter), control (e.g., linear quadratic regulator), and statistics (e.g., hypothesis testing).

distribution arises naturally when we consider sums of independent and identically distributed random variables. This is known as the central limit theorem (Grinstead and Snell, 1997).

Figure 6.8 Gaussian distributions overlaid with 100 samples. (a) One- dimensional case;
(b) two-dimensional case.



0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00



-5.0	-2.5	0.0	2.5	5.0	7.5


8

6

4

2

0

-2
-4
1	0	1
x1

(a) Univariate (one-dimensional) Gaussian; The red cross shows the mean and the red line shows the extent of the variance.
(b) 
Multivariate (two-dimensional) Gaus- sian, viewed from top. The red cross shows the mean and the colored lines show the con- tour lines of the density.



  For a univariate random variable, the Gaussian distribution has a den- sity that is given by

2		1	



( (x - µ)2 i





multivariate Gaussian distribution mean vector

The multivariate Gaussian distribution is fully characterized by a mean vector µ and a covariance matrix S and defined as
p(x | µ, S) = (2p)- D |S|- 1 exp ( - 1 (x - µ)?S-1(x - µ)) ,	(6.63)


Also known as a multivariate normal distribution.



standard normal

where x RD. We write p(x) = x µ, S or X	µ, S . Fig- ure 6.7 shows a bivariate Gaussian (mesh), with the corresponding con- tour plot. Figure 6.8 shows a univariate Gaussian and a bivariate Gaussian with corresponding samples. The special case of the Gaussian with zero mean and identity covariance, that is, µ = 0 and S = I, is referred to as the standard normal distribution.

distribution		Gaussians are widely used in statistical estimation and machine learn- ing as they have closed-form expressions for marginal and conditional dis- tributions. In Chapter 9, we use these closed-form expressions extensively for linear regression. A major advantage of modeling with Gaussian ran- dom variables is that variable transformations (Section 6.7) are often not needed. Since the Gaussian distribution is fully specified by its mean and covariance, we often can obtain the transformed distribution by applying the transformation to the mean and covariance of the random variable.

6.5.1 Marginals and Conditionals of Gaussians are Gaussians
In the following, we present marginalization and conditioning in the gen- eral case of multivariate random variables. If this is confusing at first read- ing, the reader is advised to consider two univariate random variables in- stead. Let X and Y be two multivariate random variables, that may have

different dimensions. To consider the effect of applying the sum rule of probability and the effect of conditioning, we explicitly write the Gaus- sian distribution in terms of the concatenated states [x?, y?],
p(x, y) = N ((µxl , (Sxx	Sxy li .	(6.64)

where Sxx = Cov[x, x] and Syy = Cov[y, y] are the marginal covari- ance matrices of x and y, respectively, and Sxy = Cov[x, y] is the cross- covariance matrix between x and y.
  The conditional distribution p(x y) is also Gaussian (illustrated in Fig- ure 6.9(c)) and given by (derived in Section 2.3 of Bishop, 2006)
p(x | y) = N(µx | y, Sx | y)	(6.65)
µ	= µ  + SxyS-1(y - µ )	(6.66)
Sx | y = Sxx - Sxy S-1Syx .	(6.67)
Note that in the computation of the mean in (6.66), the y-value is an observation and no longer random.
Remark. The conditional Gaussian distribution shows up in many places, where we are interested in posterior distributions:
The Kalman filter (Kalman, 1960), one of the most central algorithms for state estimation in signal processing, does nothing but computing Gaussian conditionals of joint distributions (Deisenroth and Ohlsson, 2011; Sa¨rkka¨, 2013).
Gaussian processes (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006), which are a prac- tical implementation of a distribution over functions. In a Gaussian pro- cess, we make assumptions of joint Gaussianity of random variables. By (Gaussian) conditioning on observed data, we can determine a poste- rior distribution over functions.
Latent linear Gaussian models (Roweis and Ghahramani, 1999; Mur- phy, 2012), which include probabilistic principal component analysis (PPCA) (Tipping and Bishop, 1999). We will look at PPCA in more de- tail in Section 10.7.
?
  The marginal distribution p(x) of a joint Gaussian distribution p(x, y) (see (6.64)) is itself Gaussian and computed by applying the sum rule (6.20) and given by
              p(x) = - p(x, y)dy = N x | µx, Sxx  .	(6.68)
The corresponding result holds for p(y), which is obtained by marginaliz- ing with respect to x. Intuitively, looking at the joint distribution in (6.64), we ignore (i.e., integrate out) everything we are not interested in. This is illustrated in Figure 6.9(b).





Figure 6.9
(a) Bivariate Gaussian;
(b) marginal of a joint Gaussian distribution is Gaussian; (c) the conditional distribution of a Gaussian is also Gaussian.

Example 6.6





8

6

4

2

0	x2 = -1
-2
-4
1	0	1
x1

(a) Bivariate Gaussian.





0.6


0.4


0.2

p(x1) Mean 2s

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

p(x1|x2 = -1) Mean
2s


0.0

-1.5  -1.0  -0.5	0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
(b) Marginal distribution.

0.0

-1.5  -1.0  -0.5	0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
(c) Conditional distribution.

Consider the bivariate Gaussian distribution (illustrated in Figure 6.9):

1	2	2

-1	5

We can compute the parameters of the univariate Gaussian, conditioned on x2 = 1, by applying (6.66) and (6.67) to obtain the mean and vari- ance respectively. Numerically, this is
µx1 | x2 =-1 = 0 + (-1) · 0.2 · (-1 - 2) = 0.6	(6.70)

and

s2
x1 | x2 =-1

= 0.3 - (-1) · 0.2 · (-1) = 0.1 .	(6.71)

Therefore, the conditional Gaussian is given by
p(x1 | x2 = -1) = N 0.6, 0.1 .	(6.72)
  The marginal distribution p(x1), in contrast, can be obtained by apply- ing (6.68), which is essentially using the mean and variance of the random variable x1, giving us
p(x1) = N(0, 0.3) .	(6.73)

6.5.2 Product of Gaussian Densities
For linear regression (Chapter 9), we need to compute a Gaussian likeli- hood. Furthermore, we may wish to assume a Gaussian prior (Section 9.3). We apply Bayes' Theorem to compute the posterior, which results in a mul- tiplication of the likelihood and the prior, that is, the multiplication of two


is a Gaussian distribution scaled by a c ? R, given by c N x | c, C with
C = (A-1 + B-1)-1	(6.74)
c = C(A-1a + B-1b)	(6.75)
c = (2p)- D |A + B|- 1 exp ( - 1 (a - b)?(A + B)-1(a - b)) . (6.76)

exercise at the end of this chapter.

The scaling constant c itself can be written in the form of a Gaussian density either in a or in b with an "inflated" covariance matrix A + B,

i.e., c = N a | b, A + B  = N b | a, A + B .
Remark. For notation convenience, we will sometimes use N

(x | m, S)

to describe the functional form of a Gaussian density even if x is not a random variable. We have just done this in the preceding demonstration when we wrote
c = N a | b, A + B  = N b | a, A + B .	(6.77)
Here, neither a nor b are random variables. However, writing c in this way is more compact than (6.76).	?

6.5.3 Sums and Linear Transformations
If X, Y are independent Gaussian random variables (i.e., the joint distri- bution is given as p(x, y) = p(x)p(y)) with p(x) =   x µ , S  and
p(y) = N(y | µy, Sy), then x + y is also Gaussian distributed and given
               p(x + y) = N µx + µy, Sx + Sy .	(6.78)
Knowing that p(x + y) is Gaussian, the mean and covariance matrix can be determined immediately using the results from (6.46) through (6.49). This property will be important when we consider i.i.d. Gaussian noise acting on random variables, as is the case for linear regression (Chap- ter 9).


Remark. A case that will be useful in Chapter 11 is the weighted sum of Gaussian densities. This is different from the weighted sum of Gaussian random variables.	?
  In Theorem 6.12, the random variable x is from a density that is a mixture of two densities p1(x) and p2(x), weighted by a. The theorem can be generalized to the multivariate random variable case, since linearity of expectations holds also for multivariate random variables. However, the idea of a squared random variable needs to be replaced by xx?.
Theorem 6.12. Consider a mixture of two univariate Gaussian densities
p(x) = ap1(x) + (1 - a)p2(x) ,	(6.80)
where the scalar 0 < a < 1 is the mixture weight, and p1(x) and p2(x) are univariate Gaussian densities (Equation (6.62)) with different parameters, i.e., (µ1, s2) ?= (µ2, s2).
  Then the mean of the mixture density p(x) is given by the weighted sum of the means of each random variable:
E[x] = aµ1 + (1 - a)µ2 .	(6.81)
The variance of the mixture density p(x) is given by
V[x] = [as2 + (1 - a)s2]+ [aµ2 + (1 - a)µ2] - [aµ + (1 - a)µ ]2 .


Proof The mean of the mixture density p(x) is given by the weighted sum of the means of each random variable. We apply the definition of the mean (Definition 6.4), and plug in our mixture (6.80), which yields
E[x] = - 8 xp(x)dx	(6.83a)
= - 8 (axp (x) + (1 - a)xp (x)) dx	(6.83b)
= a - 8 xp (x)dx + (1 - a) - 8 xp (x)dx	(6.83c)

= aµ1 + (1 - a)µ2 .	(6.83d)
To compute the variance, we can use the raw-score version of the vari- ance from (6.44), which requires an expression of the expectation of the squared random variable. Here we use the definition of an expectation of a function (the square) of a random variable (Definition 6.3),
E[x2] = - 8 x2p(x)dx	(6.84a)
= - 8 (ax2p (x) + (1 - a)x2p (x)) dx	(6.84b)

= a - 8 x2p (x)dx + (1 - a) - 8 x2p (x)dx	(6.84c)

= a(µ2 + s2) + (1 - a)(µ2 + s2) ,	(6.84d)
where in the last equality, we again used the raw-score version of the variance (6.44) giving s2 = E[x2] µ2. This is rearranged such that the expectation of a squared random variable is the sum of the squared mean and the variance.
Therefore, the variance is given by subtracting (6.83d) from (6.84d),
V[x] = E[x2] - (E[x])2	(6.85a)
= a(µ2 + s2) + (1 - a)(µ2 + s2) - (aµ1 + (1 - a)µ2)2	(6.85b)

+ [aµ2 + (1 - a)µ2] - [aµ + (1 - a)µ ]2  .	(6.85c)

Remark. The preceding derivation holds for any density, but since the Gaussian is fully determined by the mean and variance, the mixture den- sity can be determined in closed form.	?
  For a mixture density, the individual components can be considered to be conditional distributions (conditioned on the component identity).
Equation (6.85c) is an example of the conditional variance formula, also
known as the law of total variance, which generally states that for two ran-  law of total variance
dom variables X and Y it holds that VX[x] = EY [VX[x y]]+VY [EX[x y]], i.e., the (total) variance of X is the expected conditional variance plus the variance of a conditional mean.
  We consider in Example 6.17 a bivariate standard Gaussian random variable X and performed a linear transformation Ax on it. The outcome is a Gaussian random variable with mean zero and covariance AA?. Ob- serve that adding a constant vector will change the mean of the distribu- tion, without affecting its variance, that is, the random variable x + µ is Gaussian with mean µ and identity covariance. Hence, any linear/affine
transformation of a Gaussian random variable is Gaussian distributed.   Any linear/affine

  Consider a Gaussian distributed random variable X	µ, S . For a given matrix A of appropriate shape, let Y be a random variable such that y = Ax is a transformed version of x. We can compute the mean of y by exploiting that the expectation is a linear operator (6.50) as follows:
E[y] = E[Ax] = AE[x] = Aµ .	(6.86)
Similarly the variance of y can be found by using (6.51):
V[y] = V[Ax] = AV[x]A? = ASA? .	(6.87)
This means that the random variable y is distributed according to
p(y) = N(y | Aµ, ASA?).	(6.88)

transformation of a Gaussian random variable is also Gaussian distributed.

Let us now consider the reverse transformation: when we know that a random variable has a mean that is a linear transformation of another random variable. For a given full rank matrix A ? RM×N , where M ? N , let y ? RM be a Gaussian random variable with mean Ax, i.e.,
p(y) = N y | Ax, S .	(6.89)
What is the corresponding probability distribution p(x)? If A is invert- ible, then we can write x = A-1y and apply the transformation in the previous paragraph. However, in general A is not invertible, and we use an approach similar to that of the pseudo-inverse (3.57). That is, we pre- multiply both sides with A? and then invert A?A, which is symmetric and positive definite, giving us the relation

y = Ax ?? (A?A)-1A?y = x .	(6.90)
Hence, x is a linear transformation of y, and we obtain
p(x) = N(x | (A?A)-1A?y, (A?A)-1A?SA(A?A)-1) .	(6.91)




















To compute the Cholesky factorization of a matrix, it is required that the matrix is symmetric and positive definite (Section 3.2.3).
Covariance matrices possess this property.
6.5.4 
Sampling from Multivariate Gaussian Distributions
We will not explain the subtleties of random sampling on a computer, and the interested reader is referred to Gentle (2004). In the case of a mul- tivariate Gaussian, this process consists of three stages: first, we need a source of pseudo-random numbers that provide a uniform sample in the interval [0,1]; second, we use a non-linear transformation such as the Box-Mu¨ller transform (Devroye, 1986) to obtain a sample from a univari- ate Gaussian; and third, we collate a vector of these samples to obtain a sample from a multivariate standard normal  0, I .
  For a general multivariate Gaussian, that is, where the mean is non zero and the covariance is not the identity matrix, we use the proper- ties of linear transformations of a Gaussian random variable. Assume we are interested in generating samples xi, i = 1, . . . , n, from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean µ and covariance matrix S. We would like to construct the sample from a sampler that provides samples from the multivariate standard normal N 0, I .
  To obtain samples from a multivariate normal  µ, S , we can use the properties of a linear transformation of a Gaussian random variable: If x	0, I , then y = Ax + µ, where AA? = S is Gaussian dis- tributed with mean µ and covariance matrix S. One convenient choice of A is to use the Cholesky decomposition (Section 4.3) of the covariance matrix S = AA?. The Cholesky decomposition has the benefit that A is triangular, leading to efficient computation.

6.6 Conjugacy and the Exponential Family
Many of the probability distributions "with names" that we find in statis- tics textbooks were discovered to model particular types of phenomena. For example, we have seen the Gaussian distribution in Section 6.5. The distributions are also related to each other in complex ways (Leemis and McQueston, 2008). For a beginner in the field, it can be overwhelming to figure out which distribution to use. In addition, many of these distribu-
tions were discovered at a time that statistics and computation were done  "Computers" used to

by pencil and paper. It is natural to ask what are meaningful concepts in the computing age (Efron and Hastie, 2016). In the previous section, we saw that many of the operations required for inference can be conve- niently calculated when the distribution is Gaussian. It is worth recalling at this point the desiderata for manipulating probability distributions in the machine learning context:
1. There is some "closure property" when applying the rules of probability, e.g., Bayes' theorem. By closure, we mean that applying a particular operation returns an object of the same type.
2. As we collect more data, we do not need more parameters to describe the distribution.
3. Since we are interested in learning from data, we want parameter es- timation to behave nicely.

be a job description.

It turns out that the class of distributions called the exponential family  exponential family
provides the right balance of generality while retaining favorable compu- tation and inference properties. Before we introduce the exponential fam- ily, let us see three more members of "named" probability distributions, the Bernoulli (Example 6.8), Binomial (Example 6.9), and Beta (Exam- ple 6.10) distributions.

  An example where the Bernoulli distribution can be used is when we are interested in modeling the probability of "heads" when flipping a coin.



Figure 6.10 Examples of the Binomial distribution for
µ ? {0.1, 0.4, 0.75}
and N = 15.



0.3


0.2



0.1



0.0

0.0	2.5	5.0	7.5	10.0	12.5	15.0
Number m of observations x = 1 in N = 15 experiments


Remark. The rewriting above of the Bernoulli distribution, where we use Boolean variables as numerical 0 or 1 and express them in the exponents, is a trick that is often used in machine learning textbooks. Another oc- curence of this is when expressing the Multinomial distribution.	?



Binomial distribution













  An example where the Binomial could be used is if we want to describe the probability of observing m "heads" in N coin-flip experiments if the probability for observing head in a single experiment is µ.



Beta distribution



















Figure 6.11 Examples of the Beta distribution for different values of a and ß.









  Intuitively, a moves probability mass toward 1, whereas ß moves prob- ability mass toward 0. There are some special cases (Murphy, 2012):
For a = 1 = ß, we obtain the uniform distribution U[0, 1].
For a, ß < 1, we get a bimodal distribution with spikes at 0 and 1. For a, ß > 1, the distribution is unimodal.
For a, ß > 1 and a = ß, the distribution is unimodal, symmetric, and centered in the interval [0, 1], i.e., the mode/mean is at 1 .
Remark. There is a whole zoo of distributions with names, and they are related in different ways to each other (Leemis and McQueston, 2008). It is worth keeping in mind that each named distribution is created for a particular reason, but may have other applications. Knowing the reason behind the creation of a particular distribution often allows insight into how to best use it. We introduced the preceding three distributions to be















conjugate prior conjugate

able to illustrate the concepts of conjugacy (Section 6.6.1) and exponen- tial families (Section 6.6.3).	?

6.6.1 Conjugacy
According to Bayes' theorem (6.23), the posterior is proportional to the product of the prior and the likelihood. The specification of the prior can be tricky for two reasons: First, the prior should encapsulate our knowl- edge about the problem before we see any data. This is often difficult to describe. Second, it is often not possible to compute the posterior distribu- tion analytically. However, there are some priors that are computationally convenient: conjugate priors.
Definition 6.13 (Conjugate Prior). A prior is conjugate for the likelihood function if the posterior is of the same form/type as the prior.
  Conjugacy is particularly convenient because we can algebraically cal- culate our posterior distribution by updating the parameters of the prior distribution.
Remark. When considering the geometry of probability distributions, con- jugate priors retain the same distance structure as the likelihood (Agarwal and Daum´e III, 2010).	?
  To introduce a concrete example of conjugate priors, we describe in Ex- ample 6.11 the Binomial distribution (defined on discrete random vari- ables) and the Beta distribution (defined on continuous random vari- ables).




Likelihood	Conjugate prior	Posterior
Bernoulli	Beta	Beta
Binomial	Beta	Beta
Gaussian Gaussian/inverse Gamma Gaussian/inverse Gamma Gaussian Gaussian/inverse Wishart Gaussian/inverse Wishart Multinomial Dirichlet	Dirichlet


Table 6.2 Examples of conjugate priors for common likelihood functions.





  In the following example, we will derive a result that is similar to the Beta-Binomial conjugacy result. Here we will show that the Beta distribu- tion is a conjugate prior for the Bernoulli distribution.


Table 6.2 lists examples for conjugate priors for the parameters of some
standard likelihoods used in probabilistic modeling. Distributions such as	The Gamma prior is

Multinomial, inverse Gamma, inverse Wishart, and Dirichlet can be found in any statistical text, and are described in Bishop (2006), for example.
  The Beta distribution is the conjugate prior for the parameter µ in both the Binomial and the Bernoulli likelihood. For a Gaussian likelihood func- tion, we can place a conjugate Gaussian prior on the mean. The reason why the Gaussian likelihood appears twice in the table is that we need to distinguish the univariate from the multivariate case. In the univariate (scalar) case, the inverse Gamma is the conjugate prior for the variance. In the multivariate case, we use a conjugate inverse Wishart distribution as a prior on the covariance matrix. The Dirichlet distribution is the conju-

conjugate for the precision (inverse variance) in the univariate Gaussian likelihood, and the Wishart prior is conjugate for the precision matrix (inverse covariance matrix) in the multivariate Gaussian likelihood.

gate prior for the multinomial likelihood function. For further details, we refer to Bishop (2006).









sufficient statistics

















Fisher-Neyman
6.6.2 
Sufficient Statistics
Recall that a statistic of a random variable is a deterministic function of that random variable. For example, if x = [x1, . . . , xN ]? is a vector of univariate Gaussian random variables, that is, xn	µ, s2 , then the sample mean µˆ =  1 (x1 +  + xN ) is a statistic. Sir Ronald Fisher dis- covered the notion of sufficient statistics: the idea that there are statistics that will contain all available information that can be inferred from data corresponding to the distribution under consideration. In other words, suf- ficient statistics carry all the information needed to make inference about the population, that is, they are the statistics that are sufficient to repre- sent the distribution.
  For a set of distributions parametrized by ?, let X be a random variable with distribution p(x ?0) given an unknown ?0. A vector ?(x) of statistics is called sufficient statistics for ?0 if they contain all possible informa- tion about ?0. To be more formal about "contain all possible information", this means that the probability of x given ? can be factored into a part that does not depend on ?, and a part that depends on ? only via ?(x). The Fisher-Neyman factorization theorem formalizes this notion, which we state in Theorem 6.14 without proof.
Theorem 6.14 (Fisher-Neyman). [Theorem 6.5 in Lehmann and Casella (1998)] Let X have probability density function p(x | ?). Then the statistics

theorem	?(x) are sufficient for ? if and only if p(x | ?) can be written in the form
                   p(x | ?) = h(x)g?(?(x)) ,	(6.106)
where h(x) is a distribution independent of ? and g? captures all the depen- dence on ? via sufficient statistics ?(x).
  If p(x ?) does not depend on ?, then ?(x) is trivially a sufficient statistic for any function ?. The more interesting case is that p(x ?) is dependent only on ?(x) and not x itself. In this case, ?(x) is a sufficient statistic for ?.
  In machine learning, we consider a finite number of samples from a distribution. One could imagine that for simple distributions (such as the Bernoulli in Example 6.8) we only need a small number of samples to estimate the parameters of the distributions. We could also consider the opposite problem: If we have a set of data (a sample from an unknown distribution), which distribution gives the best fit? A natural question to ask is, as we observe more data, do we need more parameters ? to de- scribe the distribution? It turns out that the answer is yes in general, and this is studied in non-parametric statistics (Wasserman, 2007). A converse question is to consider which class of distributions have finite-dimensional

sufficient statistics, that is the number of parameters needed to describe them does not increase arbitrarily. The answer is exponential family dis- tributions, described in the following section.

6.6.3 Exponential Family
There are three possible levels of abstraction we can have when con- sidering distributions (of discrete or continuous random variables). At level one (the most concrete end of the spectrum), we have a particu- lar named distribution with fixed parameters, for example a univariate Gaussian 0, 1 with zero mean and unit variance. In machine learning, we often use the second level of abstraction, that is, we fix the paramet- ric form (the univariate Gaussian) and infer the parameters from data. For example, we assume a univariate Gaussian µ, s2 with unknown mean µ and unknown variance s2, and use a maximum likelihood fit to deter- mine the best parameters (µ, s2). We will see an example of this when considering linear regression in Chapter 9. A third level of abstraction is to consider families of distributions, and in this book, we consider the ex- ponential family. The univariate Gaussian is an example of a member of the exponential family. Many of the widely used statistical models, includ- ing all the "named" models in Table 6.2, are members of the exponential family. They can all be unified into one concept (Brown, 1986).
Remark. A brief historical anecdote: Like many concepts in mathemat- ics and science, exponential families were independently discovered at the same time by different researchers. In the years 1935-1936, Edwin Pitman in Tasmania, Georges Darmois in Paris, and Bernard Koopman in New York independently showed that the exponential families are the only families that enjoy finite-dimensional sufficient statistics under repeated independent sampling (Lehmann and Casella, 1998).	?
An exponential family is a family of probability distributions, parame-  exponential family
terized by ? ? RD, of the form
            p(x | ?) = h(x) exp (??, ?(x)? - A(?)) ,	(6.107)
where ?(x) is the vector of sufficient statistics. In general, any inner prod- uct (Section 3.2) can be used in (6.107), and for concreteness we will use the standard dot product here ( ?, ?(x) = ???(x)). Note that the form of the exponential family is essentially a particular expression of g?(?(x)) in the Fisher-Neyman theorem (Theorem 6.14).
  The factor h(x) can be absorbed into the dot product term by adding another entry (log h(x)) to the vector of sufficient statistics ?(x), and constraining the corresponding parameter ?0 = 1. The term A(?) is the normalization constant that ensures that the distribution sums up or inte-
grates to one and is called the log-partition function. A good intuitive no-  log-partition

tion of exponential families can be obtained by ignoring these two terms

function





natural parameters

and considering exponential families as distributions of the form
                    p(x | ?) ? exp ???(x) .	(6.108)
For this form of parametrization, the parameters ? are called the natural parameters. At first glance, it seems that exponential families are a mun- dane transformation by adding the exponential function to the result of a dot product. However, there are many implications that allow for conve- nient modeling and efficient computation based on the fact that we can capture information about data in ?(x).








Remark. The relationship between the original Bernoulli parameter µ and
the natural parameter ? is known as the sigmoid or logistic function. Ob-	sigmoid serve that µ	(0, 1) but ?	R, and therefore the sigmoid function squeezes a real value into the range (0, 1). This property is useful in ma-
chine learning, for example it is used in logistic regression (Bishop, 2006, section 4.3.2), as well as as a nonlinear activation functions in neural net- works (Goodfellow et al., 2016, chapter 6).	?
  It is often not obvious how to find the parametric form of the conjugate distribution of a particular distribution (for example, those in Table 6.2). Exponential families provide a convenient way to find conjugate pairs of distributions. Consider the random variable X is a member of the expo- nential family (6.107):
            p(x | ?) = h(x) exp (??, ?(x)? - A(?)) .	(6.119)
Every member of the exponential family has a conjugate prior (Brown, 1986)
p(? | ?) = h (?) exp ( (?1l , (	?	l  - A (?)i ,	(6.120)

c	?2

-A(?)


where ? =	?1	has dimension dim(?) + 1. The sufficient statistics of
?2

the conjugate prior are	?
-A(?)

l. By using the knowledge of the general

form of conjugate priors for exponential families, we can derive functional forms of conjugate priors corresponding to particular distributions.




  As mentioned in the previous section, the main motivation for expo- nential families is that they have finite-dimensional sufficient statistics. Additionally, conjugate distributions are easy to write down, and the con- jugate distributions also come from an exponential family. From an infer- ence perspective, maximum likelihood estimation behaves nicely because empirical estimates of sufficient statistics are optimal estimates of the pop- ulation values of sufficient statistics (recall the mean and covariance of a Gaussian). From an optimization perspective, the log-likelihood function is concave, allowing for efficient optimization approaches to be applied (Chapter 7).

6.7 Change of Variables/Inverse Transform
It may seem that there are very many known distributions, but in reality the set of distributions for which we have names is quite limited. There- fore, it is often useful to understand how transformed random variables are distributed. For example, assuming that X is a random variable dis- tributed according to the univariate normal distribution 0, 1 , what is the distribution of X2? Another example, which is quite common in ma- chine learning, is, given that X1 and X2 are univariate standard normal, what is the distribution of 1 (X1 + X2)?
  One option to work out the distribution of 1 (X1 + X2) is to calculate the mean and variance of X1 and X2 and then combine them. As we saw in Section 6.4.4, we can calculate the mean and variance of resulting ran- dom variables when we consider affine transformations of random vari-

ables. However, we may not be able to obtain the functional form of the distribution under transformations. Furthermore, we may be interested in nonlinear transformations of random variables for which closed-form expressions are not readily available.
Remark (Notation). In this section, we will be explicit about random vari- ables and the values they take. Hence, recall that we use capital letters X, Y to denote random variables and small letters x, y to denote the val- ues in the target space that the random variables take. We will explicitly write pmfs of discrete random variables X as P (X = x). For continuous random variables X (Section 6.2.2), the pdf is written as f (x) and the cdf is written as FX(x).	?
  We will look at two approaches for obtaining distributions of transfor- mations of random variables: a direct approach using the definition of a cumulative distribution function and a change-of-variable approach that
uses the chain rule of calculus (Section 5.2.2). The change-of-variable ap-  Moment generating

proach is widely used because it provides a "recipe" for attempting to compute the resulting distribution due to a transformation. We will ex- plain the techniques for univariate random variables, and will only briefly provide the results for the general case of multivariate random variables. Transformations of discrete random variables can be understood di- rectly. Suppose that there is a discrete random variable X with pmf P (X = x) (Section 6.2.1), and an invertible function U (x). Consider the trans-
formed random variable Y := U (X), with pmf P (Y = y). Then

P (Y = y) = P (U (X) = y)transformation of interest(6.125a)= P (X = U -1(y))inverse(6.125b)where we can observe that x = U -1(y). Therefore, for discrete random variables, transformations directly change the individual events (with the probabilities appropriately transformed).


6.7.1 Distribution Function Technique
The distribution function technique goes back to first principles, and uses the definition of a cdf FX(x) = P (X ? x) and the fact that its differential is the pdf f (x) (Wasserman, 2004, chapter 2). For a random variable X and a function U , we find the pdf of the random variable Y := U (X) by
1. Finding the cdf:

functions can also be used to study transformations of random
variables (Casella and Berger, 2002,
chapter 2).

FY (y) = P (Y ? y)	(6.126)
2. Differentiating the cdf FY (y) to get the pdf f (y).
d

f (y) =

FY (y) .	(6.127)
dy

We also need to keep in mind that the domain of the random variable may have changed due to the transformation by U .





Functions that have inverses are called bijective functions (Section 2.7).
  
In Example 6.16, we considered a strictly monotonically increasing func- tion f (x) = 3x2. This means that we could compute an inverse function. In general, we require that the function of interest y = U (x) has an in- verse x = U -1(y). A useful result can be obtained by considering the cu- mulative distribution function FX(x) of a random variable X, and using

it as the transformation U (x). This leads to the following theorem.
Theorem 6.15. [Theorem 2.1.10 in Casella and Berger (2002)] Let X be a continuous random variable with a strictly monotonic cumulative distribu- tion function FX(x). Then the random variable Y defined as
Y := FX(X)	(6.132)
has a uniform distribution.

Theorem 6.15 is known as the probability integral transform, and it is	probability integral

used to derive algorithms for sampling from distributions by transforming the result of sampling from a uniform random variable (Bishop, 2006). The algorithm works by first generating a sample from a uniform distribu- tion, then transforming it by the inverse cdf (assuming this is available) to obtain a sample from the desired distribution. The probability integral transform is also used for hypothesis testing whether a sample comes from a particular distribution (Lehmann and Romano, 2005). The idea that the output of a cdf gives a uniform distribution also forms the basis of copu- las (Nelsen, 2006).

transform



6.7.2 Change of Variables
The distribution function technique in Section 6.7.1 is derived from first principles, based on the definitions of cdfs and using properties of in- verses, differentiation, and integration. This argument from first principles relies on two facts:
1. We can transform the cdf of Y into an expression that is a cdf of X.
2. We can differentiate the cdf to obtain the pdf.
Let us break down the reasoning step by step, with the goal of understand-
ing the more general change-of-variables approach in Theorem 6.16.	Change of variables

Remark. The name "change of variables" comes from the idea of chang- ing the variable of integration when faced with a difficult integral. For univariate functions, we use the substitution rule of integration,
     - f (g(x))g'(x)dx = - f (u)du ,	where	u = g(x) .	(6.133)
The derivation of this rule is based on the chain rule of calculus (5.32) and by applying twice the fundamental theorem of calculus. The fundamental theorem of calculus formalizes the fact that integration and differentiation are somehow "inverses" of each other. An intuitive understanding of the rule can be obtained by thinking (loosely) about small changes (differen- tials) to the equation u = g(x), that is by considering ?u = g'(x)?x as a differential of u = g(x). By substituting u = g(x), the argument inside the integral on the right-hand side of (6.133) becomes f (g(x)). By pretending that the term du can be approximated by du ˜ ?u = g'(x)?x, and that dx ˜ ?x, we obtain (6.133).	?
  Consider a univariate random variable X, and an invertible function U , which gives us another random variable Y = U (X). We assume that random variable X has states x [a, b]. By the definition of the cdf, we have

in probability relies on the
change-of-variables method in
calculus (Tandra, 2014).

FY (y) = P (Y ? y) .	(6.134)

We are interested in a function U of the random variable
P (Y ? y) = P (U (X) ? y) ,	(6.135)
where we assume that the function U is invertible. An invertible function on an interval is either strictly increasing or strictly decreasing. In the case that U is strictly increasing, then its inverse U -1 is also strictly increasing. By applying the inverse U -1 to the arguments of P (U (X) ? y), we obtain
P (U (X) ? y) = P (U -1(U (X)) ? U -1(y)) = P (X ? U -1(y)) .
(6.136)
The right-most term in (6.136) is an expression of the cdf of X. Recall the definition of the cdf in terms of the pdf
- U -1(y)


Now we have an expression of the cdf of Y in terms of x:
- U -1(y)

To obtain the pdf, we differentiate (6.138) with respect to y:


f (y) =

 d	 d
dy Fy(y) = dy

U -1(y)

a


f (x)dx.	(6.139)

Note that the integral on the right-hand side is with respect to x, but we need an integral with respect to y because we are differentiating with respect to y. In particular, we use (6.133) to get the substitution
  - f (U -1(y))U -1'(y)dy = - f (x)dx	where	x = U -1(y) .	(6.140) Using (6.140) on the right-hand side of (6.139) gives us

 d
f (y) =
dy

U -1(y)

a

fx(U -1(y))U -1'(y)dy .	(6.141)

We then recall that differentiation is a linear operator and we use the subscript x to remind ourselves that fx(U -1(y)) is a function of x and not
y. Invoking the fundamental theorem of calculus again gives us
f (y) = fx(U -1(y)) · (	U -1(y)i .	(6.142)
 d

Recall that we assumed that U is a strictly increasing function. For decreas- ing functions, it turns out that we have a negative sign when we follow the same derivation. We introduce the absolute value of the differential to have the same expression for both increasing and decreasing U :


f (y) = f

(U	(y)) · 1	U	(y)1 .	(6.143)

x	1 dy	1


This is called the change-of-variable technique. The term  d U -1(y) in	change-of-variable

(6.143) measures how much a unit volume changes when applying U
(see also the definition of the Jacobian in Section 5.3).
Remark. In comparison to the discrete case in (6.125b), we have an addi- tional factor  d U -1(y) . The continuous case requires more care because
P (Y = y) = 0 for all y. The probability density function f (y) does not have a description as a probability of an event involving y.	?
  So far in this section, we have been studying univariate change of vari- ables. The case for multivariate random variables is analogous, but com- plicated by fact that the absolute value cannot be used for multivariate functions. Instead, we use the determinant of the Jacobian matrix. Recall from (5.58) that the Jacobian is a matrix of partial derivatives, and that the existence of a nonzero determinant shows that we can invert the Ja- cobian. Recall the discussion in Section 4.1 that the determinant arises because our differentials (cubes of volume) are transformed into paral- lelepipeds by the Jacobian. Let us summarize preceding the discussion in the following theorem, which gives us a recipe for multivariate change of variables.
Theorem 6.16. [Theorem 17.2 in Billingsley (1995)] Let f (x) be the value of the probability density of the multivariate continuous random variable X. If the vector-valued function y = U (x) is differentiable and invertible for all values within the domain of x, then for corresponding values of y, the probability density of Y = U (X) is given by

technique


f (y) = f

(U -1(y)) · 1det ( ? U -1(y)i1 .	(6.144)

x	1	?y	1
  The theorem looks intimidating at first glance, but the key point is that a change of variable of a multivariate random variable follows the pro- cedure of the univariate change of variable. First we need to work out the inverse transform, and substitute that into the density of x. Then we calculate the determinant of the Jacobian and multiply the result. The following example illustrates the case of a bivariate random variable.



effect of a linear transformation (Section 2.7) of the random variable. Consider a matrix A ? R2×2 defined as
A =  a	b  .	(6.146)
c	d
We are interested in finding the probability density function of the trans- formed bivariate random variable Y with states y = Ax.
  Recall that for change of variables we require the inverse transformation of x as a function of y. Since we consider linear transformations, the inverse transformation is given by the matrix inverse (see Section 2.2.2).
For 2 × 2 matrices, we can explicitly write out the formula, given by
(x1l = A-1 (y1l = 	1	 ( d	-bl (y1l .	(6.147)
x2	y2	ad - bc -c	a	y2
Observe that ad	bc is the determinant (Section 4.1) of A. The corre- sponding probability density function is given by
f (x) = f (A-1y) =  1  exp  - 1 y?A-?A-1y  .	(6.148)

The partial derivative of a matrix times a vector with respect to the vector is the matrix itself (Section 5.5), and therefore
? A-1y = A-1 .	(6.149)
?y
Recall from Section 4.1 that the determinant of the inverse is the inverse of the determinant so that the determinant of the Jacobian matrix is

det	?
?y

A-1y	= 	1	 .	(6.150)
ad - bc

We are now able to apply the change-of-variable formula from Theo- rem 6.16 by multiplying (6.148) with (6.150), which yields

f (y) = f (x) 1det ( ?

A-1yi1


(6.151a)

1	?y	1



  While Example 6.17 is based on a bivariate random variable, which al- lows us to easily compute the matrix inverse, the preceding relation holds for higher dimensions.
Remark. We saw in Section 6.5 that the density f (x) in (6.148) is actually the standard Gaussian distribution, and the transformed density f (y) is a bivariate Gaussian with covariance S = AA?.	?
We will use the ideas in this chapter to describe probabilistic modeling

6.8 Further Reading	221
in Section 8.4, as well as introduce a graphical language in Section 8.5. We will see direct machine learning applications of these ideas in Chapters 9 and 11.


6.8 Further Reading
This chapter is rather terse at times. Grinstead and Snell (1997) and Walpole et al. (2011) provide more relaxed presentations that are suit- able for self-study. Readers interested in more philosophical aspects of probability should consider Hacking (2001), whereas an approach that is more related to software engineering is presented by Downey (2014). An overview of exponential families can be found in Barndorff-Nielsen (2014). We will see more about how to use probability distributions to model machine learning tasks in Chapter 8. Ironically, the recent surge in interest in neural networks has resulted in a broader appreciation of probabilistic models. For example, the idea of normalizing flows (Jimenez Rezende and Mohamed, 2015) relies on change of variables for transform- ing random variables. An overview of methods for variational inference as applied to neural networks is described in chapters 16 to 20 of the book by Goodfellow et al. (2016).
  We side stepped a large part of the difficulty in continuous random vari- ables by avoiding measure theoretic questions (Billingsley, 1995; Pollard, 2002), and by assuming without construction that we have real numbers, and ways of defining sets on real numbers as well as their appropriate fre- quency of occurrence. These details do matter, for example, in the specifi- cation of conditional probability p(y x) for continuous random variables x, y (Proschan and Presnell, 1998). The lazy notation hides the fact that we want to specify that X = x (which is a set of measure zero). Fur- thermore, we are interested in the probability density function of y. A more precise notation would have to say Ey[f (y) s(x)], where we take the expectation over y of a test function f conditioned on the s-algebra of
x. A more technical audience interested in the details of probability the- ory have many options (Jaynes, 2003; MacKay, 2003; Jacod and Protter, 2004; Grimmett and Welsh, 2014), including some very technical discus- sions (Shiryayev, 1984; Lehmann and Casella, 1998; Dudley, 2002; Bickel and Doksum, 2006; C¸inlar, 2011). An alternative way to approach proba- bility is to start with the concept of expectation, and "work backward" to derive the necessary properties of a probability space (Whittle, 2000). As machine learning allows us to model more intricate distributions on ever more complex types of data, a developer of probabilistic machine learn- ing models would have to understand these more technical aspects. Ma- chine learning texts with a probabilistic modeling focus include the books by MacKay (2003); Bishop (2006); Rasmussen and Williams (2006); Bar- ber (2012); Murphy (2012).

Exercises
6.1 Consider the following bivariate distribution p(x, y) of two discrete random variables X and Y .

y1

Y	y2







Compute:

y3
x1	x2



x3	x4	x5 X

a. The marginal distributions p(x) and p(y).
b. The conditional distributions p(x|Y = y1) and p(y|X = x3).
6.2 Consider a mixture of two Gaussian distributions (illustrated in Figure 6.4),
0.4 N ((10l , (1 0li + 0.6 N ((0l , (8.4  2.0li .

a. Compute the marginal distributions for each dimension.
b. Compute the mean, mode and median for each marginal distribution.
c. Compute the mean and mode for the two-dimensional distribution.
6.3 You have written a computer program that sometimes compiles and some- times not (code does not change). You decide to model the apparent stochas- ticity (success vs. no success) x of the compiler using a Bernoulli distribution with parameter µ:
p(x | µ) = µx(1 - µ)1-x ,	x ? {0, 1} .
Choose a conjugate prior for the Bernoulli likelihood and compute the pos- terior distribution p(µ x1, . . . , xN ).
6.4 There are two bags. The first bag contains four mangos and two apples; the
second bag contains four mangos and four apples.
We also have a biased coin, which shows "heads" with probability 0.6 and "tails" with probability 0.4. If the coin shows "heads". we pick a fruit at random from bag 1; otherwise we pick a fruit at random from bag 2.
Your friend flips the coin (you cannot see the result), picks a fruit at random from the corresponding bag, and presents you a mango.
What is the probability that the mango was picked from bag 2?
Hint: Use Bayes' theorem.
6.5 Consider the time-series model
xt+1 = Axt + w ,	w ~ N(0, Q)
where w, v are i.i.d. Gaussian noise variables. Further, assume that p(x0) =
N(µ0, S0).

Exercises	223
a. What is the form of p(x0, x1,  , xT )? Justify your answer (you do not
have to explicitly compute the joint distribution).
b. Assume that p(xt | y1, . . . , yt) = N µt, St .
1. Compute p(xt+1 | y1,	, yt).
2. Compute p(xt+1, yt+1 | y1,	, yt).
3. At time t+1, we observe the value yt+1 = yˆ. Compute the conditional distribution p(xt+1 | y1,	, yt+1).
6.6 Prove the relationship in (6.44), which relates the standard definition of the variance to the raw-score expression for the variance.
6.7 Prove the relationship in (6.45), which relates the pairwise difference be- tween examples in a dataset with the raw-score expression for the variance.
6.8 Express the Bernoulli distribution in the natural parameter form of the ex- ponential family, see (6.107).
6.9 Express the Binomial distribution as an exponential family distribution. Also express the Beta distribution is an exponential family distribution. Show that the product of the Beta and the Binomial distribution is also a member of the exponential family.
6.10 Derive the relationship in Section 6.5.2 in two ways:
a. By completing the square
b. By expressing the Gaussian in its exponential family form
The product of two Gaussians N(x | a, A)N(x | b, B) is an unnormalized
C = (A-1 + B-1)-1
c = C(A-1a + B-1b)
c = (2p)- D | A + B | - 1 exp ( - 1 (a - b)?(A + B)-1(a - b)) .
Note that the normalizing constant c itself can be considered a (normalized) Gaussian distribution either in a or in b with an "inflated" covariance matrix A + B, i.e., c =   a b, A + B  =   b a, A + B .
6.11 Iterated Expectations.
Consider two random variables x, y with joint distribution p(x, y). Show that
EX [x] = EY EX [x | y] .
Here, EX [x y] denotes the expected value of x under the conditional distri- bution p(x y).
6.12 Manipulation of Gaussian Random Variables.
Consider a Gaussian random variable x	x µx, Sx , where x  RD.
Furthermore, we have
y = Ax + b + w ,
where y RE, A RE×D, b RE, and w	w 0, Q is indepen- dent Gaussian noise. "Independent" implies that x and w are independent random variables and that Q is diagonal.
a. Write down the likelihood	.
b. The distribution p(y) =  p(y | x)p(x)dx is Gaussian. Compute the mean
µy and the covariance Sy . Derive your result in detail.


c. The random variable y is being transformed according to the measure- ment mapping
z = Cy + v ,
where z	RF , C	RF ×E, and v	v 0, R is independent Gaus- sian (measurement) noise.
Write down p(z | y).
Compute p(z), i.e., the mean µz and the covariance Sz . Derive your result in detail.
d. Now, a value yˆ is measured. Compute the posterior distribution p(x yˆ). Hint for solution: This posterior is also Gaussian, i.e., we need to de- termine only its mean and covariance matrix. Start by explicitly com- puting the joint Gaussian p(x, y). This also requires us to compute the cross-covariances Covx,y [x, y] and Covy,x[y, x]. Then apply the rules for Gaussian conditioning.
6.13 Probability Integral Transformation
Given a continuous random variable X, with cdf FX (x), show that the ran- dom variable Y := FX (X) is uniformly distributed (Theorem 6.15).




7


Continuous Optimization




Since machine learning algorithms are implemented on a computer, the mathematical formulations are expressed as numerical optimization meth- ods. This chapter describes the basic numerical methods for training ma- chine learning models. Training a machine learning model often boils down to finding a good set of parameters. The notion of "good" is de- termined by the objective function or the probabilistic model, which we will see examples of in the second part of this book. Given an objective
function, finding the best value is done using optimization algorithms.   Since we consider

  This chapter covers two main branches of continuous optimization (Fig- ure 7.1): unconstrained and constrained optimization. We will assume in this chapter that our objective function is differentiable (see Chapter 5), hence we have access to a gradient at each location in the space to help us find the optimum value. By convention, most objective functions in ma- chine learning are intended to be minimized, that is, the best value is the minimum value. Intuitively finding the best value is like finding the val- leys of the objective function, and the gradients point us uphill. The idea is to move downhill (opposite to the gradient) and hope to find the deepest point. For unconstrained optimization, this is the only concept we need, but there are several design choices, which we discuss in Section 7.1. For constrained optimization, we need to introduce other concepts to man- age the constraints (Section 7.2). We will also introduce a special class of problems (convex optimization problems in Section 7.3) where we can make statements about reaching the global optimum.

data and models in RD, the optimization problems we face are continuous optimization problems, as opposed to combinatorial optimization problems for discrete variables.

Consider the function in Figure 7.2. The function has a global minimum  global minimum
around x = 4.5, with a function value of approximately 47. Since the function is "smooth," the gradients can be used to help find the min- imum by indicating whether we should take a step to the right or left.
This assumes that we are in the correct bowl, as there exists another local	local minimum
minimum around x = 0.7. Recall that we can solve for all the stationary
points of a function by calculating its derivative and setting it to zero. For	Stationary points

l(x) = x4 + 7x3 + 5x2 - 17x + 3 ,	(7.1)
we obtain the corresponding gradient as
dl(x) = 4x3 + 21x2 + 10x	17 .	(7.2)
dx

are the real roots of the derivative, that is, points that have zero gradient.

225
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Figure 7.1 A mind map of the concepts related to optimization, as presented in this chapter. There are two main ideas: gradient descent and convex optimization.




















Since this is a cubic equation, it has in general three solutions when set to zero. In the example, two of them are minimums and one is a maximum (around x = 1.4). To check whether a stationary point is a minimum or maximum, we need to take the derivative a second time and check whether the second derivative is positive or negative at the stationary point. In our case, the second derivative is


d2l(x) dx2


= 12x2

+ 42x + 10 .	(7.3)

By substituting our visually estimated values of x = -4.5, - 1.4, 0.7, w e
  Note that we have avoided analytically solving for values of x in the previous discussion, although for low-order polynomials such as the pre- ceding we could do so. In general, we are unable to find analytic solu- tions, and hence we need to start at some value, say x0 = 6, and follow the negative gradient. The negative gradient indicates that we should go


Figure 7.2 Example objective function.
60	Negative gradients
are indicated by arrows, and the
40	global minimum is
indicated by the
20	dashed blue line.

0

-20

-40

-60
Value of parameter


right, but not how far (this is called the step-size). Furthermore, if we	According to the

had started at the right side (e.g., x0 = 0) the negative gradient would have led us to the wrong minimum. Figure 7.2 illustrates the fact that for x > 1, the negative gradient points toward the minimum on the right of the figure, which has a larger objective value.
  In Section 7.3, we will learn about a class of functions, called convex functions, that do not exhibit this tricky dependency on the starting point of the optimization algorithm. For convex functions, all local minimums

Abel-Ruffini theorem, there is in general no algebraic solution for polynomials of degree 5 or more (Abel, 1826).

are global minimum. It turns out that many machine learning objective	For convex functions

functions are designed such that they are convex, and we will see an ex- ample in Chapter 12.
  The discussion in this chapter so far was about a one-dimensional func- tion, where we are able to visualize the ideas of gradients, descent direc- tions, and optimal values. In the rest of this chapter we develop the same ideas in high dimensions. Unfortunately, we can only visualize the con- cepts in one dimension, but some concepts do not generalize directly to higher dimensions, therefore some care needs to be taken when reading.


7.1 Optimization Using Gradient Descent
We now consider the problem of solving for the minimum of a real-valued function

min f (x) ,	(7.4)
x

all local minima are global minimum.









We use the convention of row vectors for gradients.

where f : Rd  R is an objective function that captures the machine learning problem at hand. We assume that our function f is differentiable, and we are unable to analytically find a solution in closed form.
  Gradient descent is a first-order optimization algorithm. To find a local minimum of a function using gradient descent, one takes steps propor- tional to the negative of the gradient of the function at the current point. Recall from Section 5.1 that the gradient points in the direction of the steepest ascent. Another useful intuition is to consider the set of lines where the function is at a certain value (f (x) = c for some value c	R), which are known as the contour lines. The gradient points in a direction that is orthogonal to the contour lines of the function we wish to optimize. Let us consider multivariate functions. Imagine a surface (described by the function f (x)) with a ball starting at a particular location x0. When the ball is released, it will move downhill in the direction of steepest de- scent. Gradient descent exploits the fact that f (x0) decreases fastest if one moves from x0 in the direction of the negative gradient	((  f )(x0))? of f at x0. We assume in this book that the functions are differentiable, and
refer the reader to more general settings in Section 7.4. Then, if
                 x1 = x0 - ?((?f )(x0))?	(7.5)
for a small step-size ? ? 0, then f (x1) ? f (x0). Note that we use the transpose for the gradient since otherwise the dimensions will not work out.
  This observation allows us to define a simple gradient descent algo- rithm: If we want to find a local optimum f (x*) of a function f : Rn
R, x  f (x), we start with an initial guess x0 of the parameters we wish to optimize and then iterate according to
               xi+1 = xi - ?i((?f )(xi))? .	(7.6)
For suitable step-size ?i, the sequence f (x0) ? f (x1) ? . . . converges to a local minimum.






2	90
75
1	60
45
0
30

-1
0
-2	-15
x1

Figure 7.3 Gradient descent on a
two-dimensional quadratic surface (shown as a heatmap). See Example 7.1 for a description.




Remark. Gradient descent can be relatively slow close to the minimum: Its asymptotic rate of convergence is inferior to many other methods. Us- ing the ball rolling down the hill analogy, when the surface is a long, thin valley, the problem is poorly conditioned (Trefethen and Bau III, 1997). For poorly conditioned convex problems, gradient descent increasingly "zigzags" as the gradients point nearly orthogonally to the shortest di- rection to a minimum point; see Figure 7.3.	?

7.1.1 Step-size
As mentioned earlier, choosing a good step-size is important in gradient
descent. If the step-size is too small, gradient descent can be slow. If the	The step-size is also

step-size is chosen too large, gradient descent can overshoot, fail to con- verge, or even diverge. We will discuss the use of momentum in the next section. It is a method that smoothes out erratic behavior of gradient up- dates and dampens oscillations.
  Adaptive gradient methods rescale the step-size at each iteration, de- pending on local properties of the function. There are two simple heuris- tics (Toussaint, 2012):
When the function value increases after a gradient step, the step-size was too large. Undo the step and decrease the step-size.
When the function value decreases the step could have been larger. Try to increase the step-size.

called the learning rate.

Although the "undo" step seems to be a waste of resources, using this heuristic guarantees monotonic convergence.






condition number







preconditioner













Goh (2017) wrote an intuitive blog post on gradient descent with momentum.

Remark. When applied to the solution of linear systems of equations Ax = b, gradient descent may converge slowly. The speed of convergence of gra- dient descent is dependent on the condition number ? = s(A)max , which
min
is the ratio of the maximum to the minimum singular value (Section 4.5)
of A. The condition number essentially measures the ratio of the most curved direction versus the least curved direction, which corresponds to our imagery that poorly conditioned problems are long, thin valleys: They are very curved in one direction, but very flat in the other. Instead of di- rectly solving Ax = b, one could instead solve P -1(Ax  b) = 0, where P is called the preconditioner. The goal is to design P -1 such that P -1A has a better condition number, but at the same time P -1 is easy to com- pute. For further information on gradient descent, preconditioning, and convergence we refer to Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004, chapter 9).  ?

7.1.2 Gradient Descent With Momentum
As illustrated in Figure 7.3, the convergence of gradient descent may be very slow if the curvature of the optimization surface is such that there are regions that are poorly scaled. The curvature is such that the gradient descent steps hops between the walls of the valley and approaches the optimum in small steps. The proposed tweak to improve convergence is to give gradient descent some memory.
  Gradient descent with momentum (Rumelhart et al., 1986) is a method that introduces an additional term to remember what happened in the previous iteration. This memory dampens oscillations and smoothes out the gradient updates. Continuing the ball analogy, the momentum term emulates the phenomenon of a heavy ball that is reluctant to change di- rections. The idea is to have a gradient update with memory to implement

a moving average. The momentum-based method remembers the update
?xi at each iteration i and determines the next update as a linear combi- nation of the current and previous gradients
xi+1 = xi - ?i((?f )(xi))? + a?xi	(7.11)
?xi = xi - xi-1 = a?xi-1 - ?i-1((?f )(xi-1))? ,	(7.12)
where a [0, 1]. Sometimes we will only know the gradient approxi- mately. In such cases, the momentum term is useful since it averages out different noisy estimates of the gradient. One particularly useful way to obtain an approximate gradient is by using a stochastic approximation, which we discuss next.


7.1.3 Stochastic Gradient Descent
Computing the gradient can be very time consuming. However, often it is possible to find a "cheap" approximation of the gradient. Approximating the gradient is still useful as long as it points in roughly the same direction
as the true gradient.	stochastic gradient

  Stochastic gradient descent (often shortened as SGD) is a stochastic ap- proximation of the gradient descent method for minimizing an objective function that is written as a sum of differentiable functions. The word stochastic here refers to the fact that we acknowledge that we do not know the gradient precisely, but instead only know a noisy approxima- tion to it. By constraining the probability distribution of the approximate gradients, we can still theoretically guarantee that SGD will converge.
  In machine learning, given n = 1, . . . , N data points, we often consider objective functions that are the sum of the losses Ln incurred by each example n. In mathematical notation, we have the form

descent


N
L(?) =	Ln(?) ,	(7.13)
n=1

where ? is the vector of parameters of interest, i.e., we want to find ? that minimizes L. An example from regression (Chapter 9) is the negative log- likelihood, which is expressed as a sum over log-likelihoods of individual examples so that

N
L(?) =	log p(yn xn, ?) ,	(7.14)
n=1

where xn	RD are the training inputs, yn are the training targets, and ?
are the parameters of the regression model.
  Standard gradient descent, as introduced previously, is a "batch" opti- mization method, i.e., optimization is performed using the full training set

by updating the vector of parameters according to

N
?i+1 = ?i	?i(  L(?i))? = ?i	?i	(  Ln(?i))?	(7.15)
n=1
for a suitable step-size parameter ?i. Evaluating the sum gradient may re- quire expensive evaluations of the gradients from all individual functions Ln. When the training set is enormous and/or no simple formulas exist, evaluating the sums of gradients becomes very expensive.
Consider the term  N  (?L (? )) in (7.15). We can reduce the amount
n	i
of computation by taking a sum over a smaller set of Ln. In contrast to batch gradient descent, which uses all Ln for n = 1, . . . , N , we randomly choose a subset of Ln for mini-batch gradient descent. In the extreme case, we randomly select only a single Ln to estimate the gradient. The key insight about why taking a subset of data is sensible is to realize that
for gradient descent to converge, we only require that the gradient is an
unbiased estimate of the true gradient. In fact the term  N  (?L (? ))
n	i
in (7.15) is an empirical estimate of the expected value (Section 6.4.1) of the gradient. Therefore, any other unbiased empirical estimate of the ex- pected value, for example using any subsample of the data, would suffice for convergence of gradient descent.
Remark. When the learning rate decreases at an appropriate rate, and sub- ject to relatively mild assumptions, stochastic gradient descent converges almost surely to local minimum (Bottou, 1998).	?
  Why should one consider using an approximate gradient? A major rea- son is practical implementation constraints, such as the size of central processing unit (CPU)/graphics processing unit (GPU) memory or limits on computational time. We can think of the size of the subset used to esti- mate the gradient in the same way that we thought of the size of a sample when estimating empirical means (Section 6.4.1). Large mini-batch sizes will provide accurate estimates of the gradient, reducing the variance in the parameter update. Furthermore, large mini-batches take advantage of highly optimized matrix operations in vectorized implementations of the cost and gradient. The reduction in variance leads to more stable conver- gence, but each gradient calculation will be more expensive.
  In contrast, small mini-batches are quick to estimate. If we keep the mini-batch size small, the noise in our gradient estimate will allow us to get out of some bad local optima, which we may otherwise get stuck in. In machine learning, optimization methods are used for training by min- imizing an objective function on the training data, but the overall goal is to improve generalization performance (Chapter 8). Since the goal in machine learning does not necessarily need a precise estimate of the min- imum of the objective function, approximate gradients using mini-batch approaches have been widely used. Stochastic gradient descent is very effective in large-scale machine learning problems (Bottou et al., 2018),


3	Figure 7.4
Illustration of
constrained optimization. The
2	unconstrained
problem (indicated by the contour
1	lines) has a
minimum on the right side (indicated
0	by the circle). The
box constraints (-1 ? x ? 1 and
1 ? y ? 1) require
-1	that the optimal
solution is within the box, resulting in
-2	an optimal value
indicated by the star.
-3
x1

such as training deep neural networks on millions of images (Dean et al., 2012), topic models (Hoffman et al., 2013), reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2015), or training of large-scale Gaussian process models (Hensman et al., 2013; Gal et al., 2014).

7.2 Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multipliers
In the previous section, we considered the problem of solving for the min- imum of a function


where f : RD ? R.

min f (x) ,	(7.16)
x

  In this section, we have additional constraints. That is, for real-valued functions gi : RD  R for i = 1, . . . , m, we consider the constrained optimization problem (see Figure 7.4 for an illustration)

min
x

f (x)	(7.17)

subject to	gi(x) ? 0	for all	i = 1, . . . , m.
It is worth pointing out that the functions f and gi could be non-convex in general, and we will consider the convex case in the next section.
  One obvious, but not very practical, way of converting the constrained problem (7.17) into an unconstrained one is to use an indicator function
m
J(x) = f (x) +	1(gi(x)) ,	(7.18)
i=1

where 1(z) is an infinite step function
1(z) =	0	if z ? 0
8	otherwise



.	(7.19)





Lagrange multiplier Lagrangian

This gives infinite penalty if the constraint is not satisfied, and hence would provide the same solution. However, this infinite step function is equally difficult to optimize. We can overcome this difficulty by introduc- ing Lagrange multipliers. The idea of Lagrange multipliers is to replace the step function with a linear function.
  We associate to problem (7.17) the Lagrangian by introducing the La- grange multipliers ?i ? 0 corresponding to each inequality constraint re- spectively (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, chapter 4) so that


m
L(x, ?) = f (x) +	?igi(x)	(7.20a)
i=1
= f (x) + ??g(x) ,	(7.20b)
where in the last line we have concatenated all constraints gi(x) into a vector g(x), and all the Lagrange multipliers into a vector ?  Rm.
  We now introduce the idea of Lagrangian duality. In general, duality in optimization is the idea of converting an optimization problem in one set of variables x (called the primal variables), into another optimization problem in a different set of variables ? (called the dual variables). We introduce two different approaches to duality: In this section, we discuss Lagrangian duality; in Section 7.3.3, we discuss Legendre-Fenchel duality.
Definition 7.1. The problem in (7.17)

min
x

f (x)	(7.21)



primal problem
Lagrangian dual problem

subject to	gi(x) ? 0	for all	i = 1, . . . , m
is known as the primal problem, corresponding to the primal variables x. The associated Lagrangian dual problem is given by

max
??Rm

D(?)

(7.22)







minimax inequality

subject to	? ? 0 ,
where ? are the dual variables and D(?) = minx?Rd L(x, ?).
Remark. In the discussion of Definition 7.1, we use two concepts that are also of independent interest (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004).
  First is the minimax inequality, which says that for any function with two arguments f(x, y), the maximin is less than the minimax, i.e.,
max min f(x, y) ? min max f(x, y) .	(7.23)

y	x	x	y

This inequality can be proved by considering the inequality
For all x, y	min f(x, y) ? max f(x, y) .	(7.24)
x	y
Note that taking the maximum over y of the left-hand side of (7.24) main- tains the inequality since the inequality is true for all y. Similarly, we can take the minimum over x of the right-hand side of (7.24) to obtain (7.23).
The second concept is weak duality, which uses (7.23) to show that  weak duality
primal values are always greater than or equal to dual values. This is de- scribed in more detail in (7.27).	?
  Recall that the difference between J(x) in (7.18) and the Lagrangian in (7.20b) is that we have relaxed the indicator function to a linear func- tion. Therefore, when ? ? 0, the Lagrangian L(x, ?) is a lower bound of
J(x). Hence, the maximum of L(x, ?) with respect to ? is
J(x) = max L(x, ?) .	(7.25)
??0
Recall that the original problem was minimizing J(x),
min max L(x, ?) .	(7.26)
x?Rd ??0
By the minimax inequality (7.23), it follows that swapping the order of the minimum and maximum results in a smaller value, i.e.,
min max L(x, ?) ? max min L(x, ?) .	(7.27)
x?Rd ??0	??0 x?Rd
This is also known as weak duality. Note that the inner part of the right-	weak duality
hand side is the dual objective function D(?) and the definition follows. In contrast to the original optimization problem, which has constraints,
minx?Rd L(x, ?) is an unconstrained optimization problem for a given value of ?. If solving minx?Rd L(x, ?) is easy, then the overall problem is easy to solve. We can see this by observing from (7.20b) that L(x, ?) is affine with respect to ?. Therefore minx?Rd L(x, ?) is a pointwise min- imum of affine functions of ?, and hence D(?) is concave even though f ( ) and gi( ) may be nonconvex. The outer problem, maximization over ?, is the maximum of a concave function and can be efficiently computed. Assuming f ( ) and gi( ) are differentiable, we find the Lagrange dual problem by differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to x, setting the differential to zero, and solving for the optimal value. We will discuss two concrete examples in Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2, where f ( ) and gi( ) are
convex.
Remark (Equality Constraints). Consider (7.17) with additional equality constraints

min
x

f (x)

subject to	gi(x) ? 0	for all	i = 1, . . . , m hj(x) = 0		for all		j = 1, . . . , n .

(7.28)

We can model equality constraints by replacing them with two inequality constraints. That is for each equality constraint hj(x) = 0 we equivalently replace it by two constraints hj(x) ? 0 and hj(x) ? 0. It turns out that the resulting Lagrange multipliers are then unconstrained.
  Therefore, we constrain the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to the inequality constraints in (7.28) to be non-negative, and leave the La- grange multipliers corresponding to the equality constraints unconstrained.
?









convex optimization problem
strong duality



convex set



Figure 7.5 Example


7.3 Convex Optimization
We focus our attention of a particularly useful class of optimization prob- lems, where we can guarantee global optimality. When f ( ) is a convex function, and when the constraints involving g( ) and h( ) are convex sets, this is called a convex optimization problem. In this setting, we have strong duality: The optimal solution of the dual problem is the same as the opti- mal solution of the primal problem. The distinction between convex func- tions and convex sets are often not strictly presented in machine learning literature, but one can often infer the implied meaning from context.
Definition 7.2. A set  is a convex set if for any x, y   and for any scalar
? with 0 ? ? ? 1, we have
?x + (1 - ?)y ? C .	(7.29)

of a convex set.		Convex sets are sets such that a straight line connecting any two ele- ments of the set lie inside the set. Figures 7.5 and 7.6 illustrate convex and nonconvex sets, respectively.
  Convex functions are functions such that a straight line between any two points of the function lie above the function. Figure 7.2 shows a non- convex function, and Figure 7.3 shows a convex function. Another convex

Figure 7.6 Example of a nonconvex set.

convex function concave function


epigraph

function is shown in Figure 7.7.
Definition 7.3. Let function f : RD R be a function whose domain is a convex set. The function f is a convex function if for all x, y in the domain of f , and for any scalar ? with 0 ? ? ? 1, we have
f (?x + (1 - ?)y) ? ?f (x) + (1 - ?)f (y) .	(7.30)
Remark. A concave function is the negative of a convex function.	?
  The constraints involving g( ) and h( ) in (7.28) truncate functions at a scalar value, resulting in sets. Another relation between convex functions and convex sets is to consider the set obtained by "filling in" a convex function. A convex function is a bowl-like object, and we imagine pouring water into it to fill it up. This resulting filled-in set, called the epigraph of the convex function, is a convex set.
If a function f : Rn ? R is differentiable, we can specify convexity in


Figure 7.7 Example of a convex
40	function.

30

20

10

0
-3	-2	-1	0	1	2	3

terms of its gradient xf (x) (Section 5.2). A function f (x) is convex if and only if for any two points x, y it holds that
           f (y) ? f (x) + ?xf (x)?(y - x) .	(7.31)
If we further know that a function f (x) is twice differentiable, that is, the Hessian (5.147) exists for all values in the domain of x, then the function f (x) is convex if and only if ?2 f (x) is positive semidefinite (Boyd and
Vandenberghe, 2004).



Figure 7.8 The negative entropy
function (which is	10
convex) and its
tangent at x = 2.
5
0
0	1	2	3	4	5
x
  We can check that a function or set is convex from first principles by recalling the definitions. In practice, we often rely on operations that pre- serve convexity to check that a particular function or set is convex. Al- though the details are vastly different, this is again the idea of closure that we introduced in Chapter 2 for vector spaces.



Remark. The inequality in (7.30) is sometimes called Jensen's inequality.	Jensen's inequality
In fact, a whole class of inequalities for taking nonnegative weighted sums of convex functions are all called Jensen's inequality.	?
In summary, a constrained optimization problem is called a convex opti-	convex optimization

mization problem if


minf (x)
x

problem

subject to gi(x) ? 0	for all	i = 1, . . . , m hj(x) = 0		for all		j = 1, . . . , n ,

(7.38)

where all functions f (x) and gi(x) are convex functions, and all hj(x) = 0 are convex sets. In the following, we will describe two classes of convex optimization problems that are widely used and well understood.

7.3.1 Linear Programming
Consider the special case when all the preceding functions are linear, i.e.,

min
x?Rd

c?x	(7.39)

subject to	Ax ? b ,
where A ? Rm×d and b ? Rm. This is known as a linear program. It has d	linear program

variables and m linear constraints. The Lagrangian is given by
              L(x, ?) = c?x + ??(Ax - b) ,	(7.40)
where ?	Rm is the vector of non-negative Lagrange multipliers. Rear- ranging the terms corresponding to x yields
              L(x, ?) = (c + A??)?x - ??b .	(7.41)
Taking the derivative of L(x, ?) with respect to x and setting it to zero gives us

Linear programs are one of the most widely used approaches in industry.

c + A?? = 0 .	(7.42)
Therefore, the dual Lagrangian is D(?) = ??b. Recall we would like to maximize D(?). In addition to the constraint due to the derivative of L(x, ?) being zero, we also have the fact that ? ? 0, resulting in the
following dual optimization problem	It is convention to minimize the primal

max
??Rm

- b??	(7.43)

and maximize the dual.

subject to	c + A?? = 0
? ? 0 .
This is also a linear program, but with m variables. We have the choice of solving the primal (7.39) or the dual (7.43) program depending on

whether m or d is larger. Recall that d is the number of variables and m is the number of constraints in the primal linear program.

























Figure 7.9 Illustration of a linear program. The unconstrained problem (indicated by the contour lines) has a minimum on the right side. The optimal value given the constraints are shown by the star.

7.3.2 Quadratic Programming
Consider the case of a convex quadratic objective function, where the con- straints are affine, i.e.,


min
x?Rd

1 x?Qx + c?x	(7.45)
2

subject to	Ax ? b ,
where A	Rm×d, b	Rm, and c	Rd. The square symmetric matrix Q Rd×d is positive definite, and therefore the objective function is convex. This is known as a quadratic program. Observe that it has d variables and m linear constraints.


The Lagrangian is given by

1
L(x, ?) =	x?
2


Qx + c?


x + ??

(Ax - b)	(7.48a)

= 1 x? 2

Qx + (c + A?

?)?

x - ??

b ,	(7.48b)

where again we have rearranged the terms. Taking the derivative of L(x, ?) with respect to x and setting it to zero gives
Qx + (c + A??) = 0 .	(7.49)
Assuming that Q is invertible, we get
x = -Q-1(c + A??) .	(7.50)
Substituting (7.50) into the primal Lagrangian L(x, ?), we get the dual Lagrangian
D(?) = - 1 (c + A??)?Q-1(c + A??) - ??b .	(7.51)

Therefore, the dual optimization problem is given by


max
??Rm

- 1 (c + A??)?Q-1(c + A??) - ??b


(7.52)

subject to	? ? 0 .
We will see an application of quadratic programming in machine learning in Chapter 12.









supporting
7.3.3 
Legendre-Fenchel Transform and Convex Conjugate
Let us revisit the idea of duality from Section 7.2, without considering constraints. One useful fact about a convex set is that it can be equiva- lently described by its supporting hyperplanes. A hyperplane is called a supporting hyperplane of a convex set if it intersects the convex set, and

hyperplane	the convex set is contained on just one side of it. Recall that we can fill up a convex function to obtain the epigraph, which is a convex set. Therefore, we can also describe convex functions in terms of their supporting hyper- planes. Furthermore, observe that the supporting hyperplane just touches the convex function, and is in fact the tangent to the function at that point. And recall that the tangent of a function f (x) at a given point x0 is the
evaluation of the gradient of that function at that point df(x)	. In
x=x0



Legendre transform
Physics students are often introduced to the Legendre transform as relating the Lagrangian and the Hamiltonian in classical mechanics. Legendre-Fenchel transform
convex conjugate



convex conjugate

summary, because convex sets can be equivalently described by their sup- porting hyperplanes, convex functions can be equivalently described by a function of their gradient. The Legendre transform formalizes this concept.

  We begin with the most general definition, which unfortunately has a counter-intuitive form, and look at special cases to relate the definition to the intuition described in the preceding paragraph. The Legendre-Fenchel transform is a transformation (in the sense of a Fourier transform) from a convex differentiable function f (x) to a function that depends on the tangents s(x) = xf (x). It is worth stressing that this is a transformation of the function f ( ) and not the variable x or the function evaluated at x. The Legendre-Fenchel transform is also known as the convex conjugate (for reasons we will see soon) and is closely related to duality (Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal, 2001, chapter 5).
Definition 7.4. The convex conjugate of a function f : RD  R is a function f * defined by
f *(s) = sup ( s, x	f (x)) .	(7.53)
x?RD
  Note that the preceding convex conjugate definition does not need the function f to be convex nor differentiable. In Definition 7.4, we have used a general inner product (Section 3.2) but in the rest of this section we

will consider the standard dot product between finite-dimensional vectors ( s, x = s?x) to avoid too many technical details.
To understand Definition 7.4 in a geometric fashion, consider a nice	This derivation is

simple one-dimensional convex and differentiable function, for example f (x) = x2. Note that since we are looking at a one-dimensional problem, hyperplanes reduce to a line. Consider a line y = sx+c. Recall that we are able to describe convex functions by their supporting hyperplanes, so let us try to describe this function f (x) by its supporting lines. Fix the gradi- ent of the line s  R and for each point (x0, f (x0)) on the graph of f , find the minimum value of c such that the line still intersects (x0, f (x0)). Note that the minimum value of c is the place where a line with slope s "just touches" the function f (x) = x2. The line passing through (x0, f (x0)) with gradient s is given by
y - f (x0) = s(x - x0) .	(7.54)
The y-intercept of this line is  sx0 + f (x0). The minimum of c for which
y = sx + c intersects with the graph of f is therefore
inf	sx0 + f (x0) .	(7.55)
x0
The preceding convex conjugate is by convention defined to be the nega- tive of this. The reasoning in this paragraph did not rely on the fact that we chose a one-dimensional convex and differentiable function, and holds for f : RD ? R, which are nonconvex and non-differentiable.
Remark. Convex differentiable functions such as the example f (x) = x2 is a nice special case, where there is no need for the supremum, and there is a one-to-one correspondence between a function and its Legendre trans- form. Let us derive this from first principles. For a convex differentiable function, we know that at x0 the tangent touches f (x0) so that
f (x0) = sx0 + c .	(7.56)
Recall that we want to describe the convex function f (x) in terms of its gradient ?xf (x), and that s = ?xf (x0). We rearrange to get an expres- sion for -c to obtain

easiest to understand by drawing the reasoning as it progresses.



















The classical Legendre transform is defined on convex differentiable functions in RD.

- c = sx0 - f (x0) .	(7.57)
Note that	c changes with x0 and therefore with s, which is why we can think of it as a function of s, which we call
f *(s) := sx0 - f (x0) .	(7.58)
Comparing (7.58) with Definition 7.4, we see that (7.58) is a special case (without the supremum).	?
  The conjugate function has nice properties; for example, for convex functions, applying the Legendre transform again gets us back to the orig- inal function. In the same way that the slope of f (x) is s, the slope of f *(s)

is x. The following two examples show common uses of convex conjugates in machine learning.





  Recall that in Section 7.2 we derived a dual optimization problem using Lagrange multipliers. Furthermore, for convex optimization problems we have strong duality, that is the solutions of the primal and dual problem match. The Legendre-Fenchel transform described here also can be used to derive a dual optimization problem. Furthermore, when the function is convex and differentiable, the supremum is unique. To further investi- gate the relation between these two approaches, let us consider a linear equality constrained convex optimization problem.























For general inner products, A? is
adjoint A*.

  The Legendre-Fenchel conjugate turns out to be quite useful for ma- chine learning problems that can be expressed as convex optimization problems. In particular, for convex loss functions that apply independently to each example, the conjugate loss is a convenient way to derive a dual problem.










































Hugo Gon¸calves' blog is also a good resource for an easier introduction to Legendre-Fenchel transforms: https://tinyurl. com/ydaal7hj
7.4 
Further Reading
Continuous optimization is an active area of research, and we do not try to provide a comprehensive account of recent advances.
  From a gradient descent perspective, there are two major weaknesses which each have their own set of literature. The first challenge is the fact that gradient descent is a first-order algorithm, and does not use infor- mation about the curvature of the surface. When there are long valleys, the gradient points perpendicularly to the direction of interest. The idea of momentum can be generalized to a general class of acceleration meth- ods (Nesterov, 2018). Conjugate gradient methods avoid the issues faced by gradient descent by taking previous directions into account (Shewchuk, 1994). Second-order methods such as Newton methods use the Hessian to provide information about the curvature. Many of the choices for choos- ing step-sizes and ideas like momentum arise by considering the curvature of the objective function (Goh, 2017; Bottou et al., 2018). Quasi-Newton methods such as L-BFGS try to use cheaper computational methods to ap- proximate the Hessian (Nocedal and Wright, 2006). Recently there has been interest in other metrics for computing descent directions, result- ing in approaches such as mirror descent (Beck and Teboulle, 2003) and natural gradient (Toussaint, 2012).
The second challenge is to handle non-differentiable functions. Gradi-
ent methods are not well defined when there are kinks in the function. In these cases, subgradient methods can be used (Shor, 1985). For fur- ther information and algorithms for optimizing non-differentiable func- tions, we refer to the book by Bertsekas (1999). There is a vast amount of literature on different approaches for numerically solving continuous optimization problems, including algorithms for constrained optimization problems. Good starting points to appreciate this literature are the books by Luenberger (1969) and Bonnans et al. (2006). A recent survey of con- tinuous optimization is provided by Bubeck (2015).
  Modern applications of machine learning often mean that the size of datasets prohibit the use of batch gradient descent, and hence stochastic gradient descent is the current workhorse of large-scale machine learning methods. Recent surveys of the literature include Hazan (2015) and Bot- tou et al. (2018).
  For duality and convex optimization, the book by Boyd and Vanden- berghe (2004) includes lectures and slides online. A more mathematical treatment is provided by Bertsekas (2009), and recent book by one of

Exercises	247
the key researchers in the area of optimization is Nesterov (2018). Con- vex optimization is based upon convex analysis, and the reader interested in more foundational results about convex functions is referred to Rock- afellar (1970), Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´echal (2001), and Borwein and Lewis (2006). Legendre-Fenchel transforms are also covered in the afore- mentioned books on convex analysis, but a more beginner-friendly pre- sentation is available at Zia et al. (2009). The role of Legendre-Fenchel transforms in the analysis of convex optimization algorithms is surveyed in Polyak (2016).


Exercises
7.1 Consider the univariate function

f(x) = x3 + 6x2 - 3x - 5.
Find its stationary points and indicate whether they are maximum, mini- mum, or saddle points.
7.2 Consider the update equation for stochastic gradient descent (Equation (7.15)). Write down the update when we use a mini-batch size of one.
7.3 Consider whether the following statements are true or false:
a. The intersection of any two convex sets is convex.
b. The union of any two convex sets is convex.
c. The difference of a convex set A from another convex set B is convex.
7.4 Consider whether the following statements are true or false:
a. The sum of any two convex functions is convex.
b. The difference of any two convex functions is convex.
c. The product of any two convex functions is convex.
d. The maximum of any two convex functions is convex.
7.5 Express the following optimization problem as a standard linear program in matrix notation

max
x?R2 , ??R

p?x + ?

subject to the constraints that ? ? 0, x0 ? 0 and x1 ? 3.
7.6 Consider the linear program illustrated in Figure 7.9,
min - (5l? (x1l


2	2
? 2	-4? (x1l

? 33 ?
?	?

subject to	-2	1	x	?	5
0	-1	-1
0	1	8
Derive the dual linear program using Lagrange duality.


7.7 Consider the quadratic program illustrated in Figure 7.4,
min 1 (x1l? (2  1l (x1l + (5l? (x1l

? 1	0 ?


x2
0	-1

?1?
? ??1??



Derive the dual quadratic program using Lagrange duality.
7.8 Consider the following convex optimization problem


min
w?RD


1 w?w 2

subject to	w?x ? 1 .
Derive the Lagrangian dual by introducing the Lagrange multiplier ?.
7.9 Consider the negative entropy of x ? RD,
D
f(x) =	xd log xd .
d=1
Derive the convex conjugate function f*(s), by assuming the standard dot product.
Hint: Take the gradient of an appropriate function and set the gradient to zero.
7.10 Consider the function
f(x) = 1 x?Ax + b?x + c ,
2
where A is strictly positive definite, which means that it is invertible. Derive the convex conjugate of f(x).
Hint: Take the gradient of an appropriate function and set the gradient to zero.
7.11 The hinge loss (which is the loss used by the support vector machine) is given by
L(a) = max{0, 1 - a} ,
If we are interested in applying gradient methods such as L-BFGS, and do not want to resort to subgradient methods, we need to smooth the kink in the hinge loss. Compute the convex conjugate of the hinge loss L*(ß) where ß is the dual variable. Add a l2 proximal term, and compute the conjugate of the resulting function
L*(ß) + ? ß2 ,
2
where ? is a given hyperparameter.

Central Machine Learning Problems



When Models Meet Data




In the first part of the book, we introduced the mathematics that form the foundations of many machine learning methods. The hope is that a reader would be able to learn the rudimentary forms of the language of mathematics from the first part, which we will now use to describe and discuss machine learning. The second part of the book introduces four pillars of machine learning:
Regression (Chapter 9)
Dimensionality reduction (Chapter 10) Density estimation (Chapter 11) Classification (Chapter 12)
The main aim of this part of the book is to illustrate how the mathematical concepts introduced in the first part of the book can be used to design machine learning algorithms that can be used to solve tasks within the remit of the four pillars. We do not intend to introduce advanced machine learning concepts, but instead to provide a set of practical methods that allow the reader to apply the knowledge they gained from the first part of the book. It also provides a gateway to the wider machine learning literature for readers already familiar with the mathematics.


8.1 Data, Models, and Learning
It is worth at this point, to pause and consider the problem that a ma- chine learning algorithm is designed to solve. As discussed in Chapter 1, there are three major components of a machine learning system: data, models, and learning. The main question of machine learning is "What do
we mean by good models?". The word model has many subtleties, and we  model
will revisit it multiple times in this chapter. It is also not entirely obvious how to objectively define the word "good". One of the guiding principles of machine learning is that good models should perform well on unseen data. This requires us to define some performance metrics, such as accu- racy or distance from ground truth, as well as figuring out ways to do well under these performance metrics. This chapter covers a few necessary bits and pieces of mathematical and statistical language that are commonly


Table 8.1 ExampleNameGenderDegreePostcodeAgeAnnual salarydata from aAdityaMMScW21BG3689563fictitious humanBobMPhDEC1A1BA47123543resource databaseChlo´eFBEconSW1A1BH2623989that is not in aDaisukeMBScSE207AT68138769numerical format.ElisabethFMBASE10AA33113888
used to talk about machine learning models. By doing so, we briefly out- line the current best practices for training a model such that the resulting predictor does well on data that we have not yet seen.
  As mentioned in Chapter 1, there are two different senses in which we use the phrase "machine learning algorithm": training and prediction. We will describe these ideas in this chapter, as well as the idea of selecting among different models. We will introduce the framework of empirical risk minimization in Section 8.2, the principle of maximum likelihood in Section 8.3, and the idea of probabilistic models in Section 8.4. We briefly outline a graphical language for specifying probabilistic models in Sec- tion 8.5 and finally discuss model selection in Section 8.6. The rest of this section expands upon the three main components of machine learning: data, models and learning.








Data is assumed to be in a tidy
format (Wickham, 2014; Codd, 1990).


8.1.1 Data as Vectors
We assume that our data can be read by a computer, and represented ade- quately in a numerical format. Data is assumed to be tabular (Figure 8.1), where we think of each row of the table as representing a particular in- stance or example, and each column to be a particular feature. In recent years, machine learning has been applied to many types of data that do not obviously come in the tabular numerical format, for example genomic se- quences, text and image contents of a webpage, and social media graphs. We do not discuss the important and challenging aspects of identifying good features. Many of these aspects depend on domain expertise and re- quire careful engineering, and, in recent years, they have been put under the umbrella of data science (Stray, 2016; Adhikari and DeNero, 2018).
  Even when we have data in tabular format, there are still choices to be made to obtain a numerical representation. For example, in Table 8.1, the gender column (a categorical variable) may be converted into numbers 0 representing "Male" and 1 representing "Female". Alternatively, the gen- der could be represented by numbers 1, +1, respectively (as shown in Table 8.2). Furthermore, it is often important to use domain knowledge when constructing the representation, such as knowing that university degrees progress from bachelor's to master's to PhD or realizing that the postcode provided is not just a string of characters but actually encodes an area in London. In Table 8.2, we converted the data from Table 8.1 to a numerical format, and each postcode is represented as two numbers,


Gender IDDegree  Latitude (in degrees) Longitude (in degrees)Age Annual Salary (in thousands)Table 8.2 Example data from a-1251.50730.12903689.563fictitious human-1351.50740.127547123.543resource database+1151.50710.12782623.989(see Table 8.1),-1151.50750.128168138.769converted to a+1251.50740.127833113.888numerical format.

a latitude and longitude. Even numerical data that could potentially be directly read into a machine learning algorithm should be carefully con- sidered for units, scaling, and constraints. Without additional information, one should shift and scale all columns of the dataset such that they have an empirical mean of 0 and an empirical variance of 1. For the purposes of this book, we assume that a domain expert already converted data ap- propriately, i.e., each input xn is a D-dimensional vector of real numbers,
which are called features, attributes, or covariates. We consider a dataset to  feature

be of the form as illustrated by Table 8.2. Observe that we have dropped the Name column of Table 8.1 in the new numerical representation. There are two main reasons why this is desirable: (1) we do not expect the iden- tifier (the Name) to be informative for a machine learning task; and (2) we may wish to anonymize the data to help protect the privacy of the employees.
  In this part of the book, we will use N to denote the number of exam- ples in a dataset and index the examples with lowercase n = 1, . . . , N . We assume that we are given a set of numerical data, represented as an array of vectors (Table 8.2). Each row is a particular individual xn, often

attribute covariate

referred to as an example or data point in machine learning. The subscript	example

n refers to the fact that this is the nth example out of a total of N exam- ples in the dataset. Each column represents a particular feature of interest about the example, and we index the features as d = 1, . . . , D. Recall that data is represented as vectors, which means that each example (each data point) is a D-dimensional vector. The orientation of the table originates from the database community, but for some machine learning algorithms (e.g., in Chapter 10) it is more convenient to represent examples as col- umn vectors.
  Let us consider the problem of predicting annual salary from age, based on the data in Table 8.2. This is called a supervised learning problem

data point

where we have a label yn (the salary) associated with each example xn	label (the age). The label yn has various other names, including target, re- sponse variable, and annotation. A dataset is written as a set of example-
label pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn), . . . , (xN , yN ) . The table of examples x1, . . . , xN is often concatenated, and written as X  RN×D. Fig- ure 8.1 illustrates the dataset consisting of the two rightmost columns of Table 8.2, where x = age and y = salary.
We use the concepts introduced in the first part of the book to formalize



Figure 8.1 Toy data for linear regression. Training data in (xn, yn) pairs from the rightmost two columns of
Table 8.2. We are interested in the salary of a person aged sixty (x = 60) illustrated as a vertical dashed red line, which is not part of the training data.


150


125	


100

75

50

25	

0
0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80
x



























feature map





kernel

the machine learning problems such as that in the previous paragraph. Representing data as vectors xn allows us to use concepts from linear al- gebra (introduced in Chapter 2). In many machine learning algorithms, we need to additionally be able to compare two vectors. As we will see in Chapters 9 and 12, computing the similarity or distance between two ex- amples allows us to formalize the intuition that examples with similar fea- tures should have similar labels. The comparison of two vectors requires that we construct a geometry (explained in Chapter 3) and allows us to optimize the resulting learning problem using techniques from Chapter 7. Since we have vector representations of data, we can manipulate data to find potentially better representations of it. We will discuss finding good representations in two ways: finding lower-dimensional approximations of the original feature vector, and using nonlinear higher-dimensional combinations of the original feature vector. In Chapter 10, we will see an example of finding a low-dimensional approximation of the original data space by finding the principal components. Finding principal components is closely related to concepts of eigenvalue and singular value decomposi- tion as introduced in Chapter 4. For the high-dimensional representation, we will see an explicit feature map ?( ) that allows us to represent in- puts xn using a higher-dimensional representation ?(xn). The main mo- tivation for higher-dimensional representations is that we can construct new features as non-linear combinations of the original features, which in turn may make the learning problem easier. We will discuss the feature map in Section 9.2 and show how this feature map leads to a kernel in Section 12.4. In recent years, deep learning methods (Goodfellow et al., 2016) have shown promise in using the data itself to learn new good fea- tures and have been very successful in areas, such as computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language processing. We will not cover neural networks in this part of the book, but the reader is referred to




150

125

100

Figure 8.2 Example function (black solid
         diagonal line) and its prediction at
x = 60, i.e.,
f (60) = 100.


75

50

25

0
0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80
x


Section 5.6 for the mathematical description of backpropagation, a key concept for training neural networks.

8.1.2 Models as Functions
Once we have data in an appropriate vector representation, we can get to
the business of constructing a predictive function (known as a predictor).  predictor
In Chapter 1, we did not yet have the language to be precise about models. Using the concepts from the first part of the book, we can now introduce what "model" means. We present two major approaches in this book: a predictor as a function, and a predictor as a probabilistic model. We de- scribe the former here and the latter in the next subsection.
  A predictor is a function that, when given a particular input example (in our case, a vector of features), produces an output. For now, consider the output to be a single number, i.e., a real-valued scalar output. This can be written as
f : RD ? R ,	(8.1)
where the input vector x is D-dimensional (has D features), and the func- tion f then applied to it (written as f (x)) returns a real number. Fig- ure 8.2 illustrates a possible function that can be used to compute the value of the prediction for input values x.
  In this book, we do not consider the general case of all functions, which would involve the need for functional analysis. Instead, we consider the special case of linear functions
f (x) = ??x + ?0	(8.2)
for unknown ? and ?0. This restriction means that the contents of Chap- ters 2 and 3 suffice for precisely stating the notion of a predictor for the non-probabilistic (in contrast to the probabilistic view described next)



Figure 8.3 Example function (black solid diagonal line) and its predictive uncertainty at
x = 60 (drawn as a Gaussian).


150

125

100

75


50

25

0
0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80
x


view of machine learning. Linear functions strike a good balance between the generality of the problems that can be solved and the amount of back- ground mathematics that is needed.



8.1.3 Models as Probability Distributions
We often consider data to be noisy observations of some true underlying effect, and hope that by applying machine learning we can identify the signal from the noise. This requires us to have a language for quantify- ing the effect of noise. We often would also like to have predictors that express some sort of uncertainty, e.g., to quantify the confidence we have about the value of the prediction for a particular test data point. As we have seen in Chapter 6, probability theory provides a language for quan- tifying uncertainty. Figure 8.3 illustrates the predictive uncertainty of the function as a Gaussian distribution.
  Instead of considering a predictor as a single function, we could con- sider predictors to be probabilistic models, i.e., models describing the dis- tribution of possible functions. We limit ourselves in this book to the spe- cial case of distributions with finite-dimensional parameters, which allows us to describe probabilistic models without needing stochastic processes and random measures. For this special case, we can think about prob- abilistic models as multivariate probability distributions, which already allow for a rich class of models.
  We will introduce how to use concepts from probability (Chapter 6) to define machine learning models in Section 8.4, and introduce a graphical language for describing probabilistic models in a compact way in Sec- tion 8.5.

8.1.4 Learning is Finding Parameters
The goal of learning is to find a model and its corresponding parame- ters such that the resulting predictor will perform well on unseen data. There are conceptually three distinct algorithmic phases when discussing machine learning algorithms:
1. Prediction or inference
2. Training or parameter estimation
3. Hyperparameter tuning or model selection
The prediction phase is when we use a trained predictor on previously un- seen test data. In other words, the parameters and model choice is already fixed and the predictor is applied to new vectors representing new input data points. As outlined in Chapter 1 and the previous subsection, we will consider two schools of machine learning in this book, corresponding to whether the predictor is a function or a probabilistic model. When we have a probabilistic model (discussed further in Section 8.4) the predic- tion phase is called inference.
Remark. Unfortunately, there is no agreed upon naming for the different algorithmic phases. The word "inference" is sometimes also used to mean parameter estimation of a probabilistic model, and less often may be also used to mean prediction for non-probabilistic models.	?
  The training or parameter estimation phase is when we adjust our pre- dictive model based on training data. We would like to find good predic- tors given training data, and there are two main strategies for doing so: finding the best predictor based on some measure of quality (sometimes called finding a point estimate), or using Bayesian inference. Finding a point estimate can be applied to both types of predictors, but Bayesian inference requires probabilistic models.
For the non-probabilistic model, we follow the principle of empirical risk  empirical risk

minimization, which we describe in Section 8.2. Empirical risk minimiza- tion directly provides an optimization problem for finding good parame-

minimization

ters. With a statistical model, the principle of maximum likelihood is used  maximum likelihood
to find a good set of parameters (Section 8.3). We can additionally model the uncertainty of parameters using a probabilistic model, which we will look at in more detail in Section 8.4.
  We use numerical methods to find good parameters that "fit" the data, and most training methods can be thought of as hill-climbing approaches to find the maximum of an objective, for example the maximum of a likeli-
hood. To apply hill-climbing approaches we use the gradients described in  The convention in

Chapter 5 and implement numerical optimization approaches from Chap- ter 7.
  As mentioned in Chapter 1, we are interested in learning a model based on data such that it performs well on future data. It is not enough for

optimization is to minimize objectives. Hence, there is often an extra minus sign in machine learning objectives.




cross-validation






abduction

A good movie title is

the model to only fit the training data well, the predictor needs to per- form well on unseen data. We simulate the behavior of our predictor on future unseen data using cross-validation (Section 8.2.4). As we will see in this chapter, to achieve the goal of performing well on unseen data, we will need to balance between fitting well on training data and finding "simple" explanations of the phenomenon. This trade-off is achieved us- ing regularization (Section 8.2.3) or by adding a prior (Section 8.3.2). In philosophy, this is considered to be neither induction nor deduction, but is called abduction. According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, abduction is the process of inference to the best explanation (Douven, 2017).

"AI abduction".		We often need to make high-level modeling decisions about the struc- ture of the predictor, such as the number of components to use or the class of probability distributions to consider. The choice of the number of

hyperparameter model selection
nested

components is an example of a hyperparameter, and this choice can af- fect the performance of the model significantly. The problem of choosing among different models is called model selection, which we describe in Section 8.6. For non-probabilistic models, model selection is often done using nested cross-validation, which is described in Section 8.6.1. We also

cross-validation	use model selection to choose hyperparameters of our model.
Remark. The distinction between parameters and hyperparameters is some- what arbitrary, and is mostly driven by the distinction between what can be numerically optimized versus what needs to use search techniques. Another way to consider the distinction is to consider parameters as the explicit parameters of a probabilistic model, and to consider hyperparam- eters (higher-level parameters) as parameters that control the distribution of these explicit parameters.	?
  In the following sections, we will look at three flavors of machine learn- ing: empirical risk minimization (Section 8.2), the principle of maximum likelihood (Section 8.3), and probabilistic modeling (Section 8.4).


8.2 Empirical Risk Minimization
After having all the mathematics under our belt, we are now in a posi- tion to introduce what it means to learn. The "learning" part of machine learning boils down to estimating parameters based on training data.
  In this section, we consider the case of a predictor that is a function, and consider the case of probabilistic models in Section 8.3. We describe the idea of empirical risk minimization, which was originally popularized by the proposal of the support vector machine (described in Chapter 12). However, its general principles are widely applicable and allow us to ask the question of what is learning without explicitly constructing probabilis- tic models. There are four main design choices, which we will cover in detail in the following subsections:

Section 8.2.1 What is the set of functions we allow the predictor to take?
Section 8.2.2 How do we measure how well the predictor performs on the training data?
Section 8.2.3 How do we construct predictors from only training data that performs well on unseen test data?
Section 8.2.4 What is the procedure for searching over the space of mod- els?

8.2.1 Hypothesis Class of Functions
Assume we are given N examples xn RD and corresponding scalar la- bels yn  R. We consider the supervised learning setting, where we obtain pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ). Given this data, we would like to estimate a predictor f ( , ?) : RD R, parametrized by ?. We hope to be able to find a good parameter ?* such that we fit the data well, that is,
          f (xn, ?*) ˜ yn	for all	n = 1, . . . , N .	(8.3)
In this section, we use the notation yˆn = f (xn, ?*) to represent the output of the predictor.
Remark. For ease of presentation, we will describe empirical risk mini- mization in terms of supervised learning (where we have labels). This simplifies the definition of the hypothesis class and the loss function. It is also common in machine learning to choose a parametrized class of functions, for example affine functions.	?






Affine functions are often referred to as linear functions in





  Given the class of functions, we want to search for a good predictor. We now move on to the second ingredient of empirical risk minimization: how to measure how well the predictor fits the training data.








loss function


The expression "error" is often used to mean loss.
independent and identically distributed



training set
8.2.2 
Loss Function for Training
Consider the label yn for a particular example; and the corresponding pre- diction yˆn that we make based on xn. To define what it means to fit the data well, we need to specify a loss function l(yn, yˆn) that takes the ground truth label and the prediction as input and produces a non-negative num- ber (referred to as the loss) representing how much error we have made on this particular prediction. Our goal for finding a good parameter vector ?* is to minimize the average loss on the set of N training examples.
  One assumption that is commonly made in machine learning is that the set of examples (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) is independent and identically distributed. The word independent (Section 6.4.5) means that two data points (xi, yi) and (xj, yj) do not statistically depend on each other, mean- ing that the empirical mean is a good estimate of the population mean (Section 6.4.1). This implies that we can use the empirical mean of the loss on the training data. For a given training set (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) , we introduce the notation of an example matrix X := [x1, . . . , xN ]? RN×D and a label vector y := [y1, . . . , yN ]?	RN . Using this matrix notation the average loss is given by




Remp

1
(f, X, y) =
N

N
l(yn
n=1


, yˆn) ,	(8.6)


empirical risk

empirical risk minimization

where yˆn = f (xn, ?). Equation (8.6) is called the empirical risk and de- pends on three arguments, the predictor f and the data X, y. This general strategy for learning is called empirical risk minimization.




















least-squares problem



  We are not interested in a predictor that only performs well on the training data. Instead, we seek a predictor that performs well (has low risk) on unseen test data. More formally, we are interested in finding a
predictor f (with parameters fixed) that minimizes the expected risk	expected risk
                Rtrue(f ) = Ex,y[l(y, f (x))] ,	(8.10)
where y is the label and f (x) is the prediction based on the example x.
The notation Rtrue(f ) indicates that this is the true risk if we had access to
an infinite amount of data. The expectation is over the (infinite) set of all	Another phrase

possible data and labels. There are two practical questions that arise from our desire to minimize expected risk, which we address in the following two subsections:

commonly used for expected risk is "population risk".


How should we change our training procedure to generalize well? How do we estimate expected risk from (finite) data?
Remark. Many machine learning tasks are specified with an associated performance measure, e.g., accuracy of prediction or root mean squared error. The performance measure could be more complex, be cost sensitive, and capture details about the particular application. In principle, the de- sign of the loss function for empirical risk minimization should correspond directly to the performance measure specified by the machine learning task. In practice, there is often a mismatch between the design of the loss function and the performance measure. This could be due to issues such as ease of implementation or efficiency of optimization.	?










test set
Even knowing only the performance of the predictor on the test set leaks information (Blum and Hardt, 2015).









overfitting

















regularization
8.2.3 
Regularization to Reduce Overfitting
This section describes an addition to empirical risk minimization that al- lows it to generalize well (approximately minimizing expected risk). Re- call that the aim of training a machine learning predictor is so that we can perform well on unseen data, i.e., the predictor generalizes well. We sim- ulate this unseen data by holding out a proportion of the whole dataset. This hold out set is referred to as the test set. Given a sufficiently rich class of functions for the predictor f , we can essentially memorize the training data to obtain zero empirical risk. While this is great to minimize the loss (and therefore the risk) on the training data, we would not expect the predictor to generalize well to unseen data. In practice, we have only a finite set of data, and hence we split our data into a training and a test set. The training set is used to fit the model, and the test set (not seen by the machine learning algorithm during training) is used to evaluate generalization performance. It is important for the user to not cycle back to a new round of training after having observed the test set. We use the subscripts train and test to denote the training and test sets, respectively. We will revisit this idea of using a finite dataset to evaluate expected risk in Section 8.2.4.
  It turns out that empirical risk minimization can lead to overfitting, i.e., the predictor fits too closely to the training data and does not general- ize well to new data (Mitchell, 1997). This general phenomenon of hav- ing very small average loss on the training set but large average loss on the test set tends to occur when we have little data and a complex hy- pothesis class. For a particular predictor f (with parameters fixed), the phenomenon of overfitting occurs when the risk estimate from the train- ing data Remp(f, Xtrain, ytrain) underestimates the expected risk Rtrue(f ). Since we estimate the expected risk Rtrue(f ) by using the empirical risk on the test set Remp(f, Xtest, ytest) if the test risk is much larger than the training risk, this is an indication of overfitting. We revisit the idea of overfitting in Section 8.3.3.
  Therefore, we need to somehow bias the search for the minimizer of empirical risk by introducing a penalty term, which makes it harder for the optimizer to return an overly flexible predictor. In machine learning, the penalty term is referred to as regularization. Regularization is a way to compromise between accurate solution of empirical risk minimization and the size or complexity of the solution.

















regularizer
regularization parameter




The regularization term is sometimes called the penalty term, which bi-  penalty term
ases the vector ? to be closer to the origin. The idea of regularization also appears in probabilistic models as the prior probability of the parameters. Recall from Section 6.6 that for the posterior distribution to be of the same form as the prior distribution, the prior and the likelihood need to be con- jugate. We will revisit this idea in Section 8.3.2. We will see in Chapter 12 that the idea of the regularizer is equivalent to the idea of a large margin.

8.2.4 Cross-Validation to Assess the Generalization Performance
We mentioned in the previous section that we measure the generalization error by estimating it by applying the predictor on test data. This data is
also sometimes referred to as the validation set. The validation set is a sub-	validation set
set of the available training data that we keep aside. A practical issue with this approach is that the amount of data is limited, and ideally we would use as much of the data available to train the model. This would require us to keep our validation set small, which then would lead to a noisy estimate (with high variance) of the predictive performance. One solu- tion to these contradictory objectives (large training set, large validation
set) is to use cross-validation. K-fold cross-validation effectively partitions  cross-validation
the data into K chunks, K  1 of which form the training set , and the last chunk serves as the validation set (similar to the idea outlined previously). Cross-validation iterates through (ideally) all combinations of assignments of chunks to and ; see Figure 8.4. This procedure is repeated for all K choices for the validation set, and the performance of the model from the K runs is averaged.
  We partition our dataset into two sets D = R? V, such that they do not overlap (R n V = Ø), where V is the validation set, and train our model on R. After training, we assess the performance of the predictor f on the



Figure 8.4 K-fold cross-validation. The dataset is divided into K = 5 chunks, K	1 of which serve as the training set (blue) and one as the validation set (orange hatch).


Training	



Validation


validation set (e.g., by computing root mean square error (RMSE) of the trained model on the validation set). More precisely, for each partition k the training data (k) produces a predictor f (k), which is then applied to validation set (k) to compute the empirical risk R(f (k), (k)). We cycle through all possible partitionings of validation and training sets and com- pute the average generalization error of the predictor. Cross-validation approximates the expected generalization error


1
EV[R(f, V)] ˜ K

K
R(f (k), V(k)) ,	(8.13)
k=1





















embarrassingly

where R(f (k), (k)) is the risk (e.g., RMSE) on the validation set (k) for predictor f (k). The approximation has two sources: first, due to the finite training set, which results in not the best possible f (k); and second, due to the finite validation set, which results in an inaccurate estimation of the risk R(f (k), (k)). A potential disadvantage of K-fold cross-validation is the computational cost of training the model K times, which can be bur- densome if the training cost is computationally expensive. In practice, it is often not sufficient to look at the direct parameters alone. For example, we need to explore multiple complexity parameters (e.g., multiple regu- larization parameters), which may not be direct parameters of the model. Evaluating the quality of the model, depending on these hyperparameters, may result in a number of training runs that is exponential in the number of model parameters. One can use nested cross-validation (Section 8.6.1) to search for good hyperparameters.
However, cross-validation is an embarrassingly parallel problem, i.e., lit-

parallel	tle effort is needed to separate the problem into a number of parallel tasks. Given sufficient computing resources (e.g., cloud computing, server farms), cross-validation does not require longer than a single performance assessment.
  In this section, we saw that empirical risk minimization is based on the following concepts: the hypothesis class of functions, the loss function and regularization. In Section 8.3, we will see the effect of using a probability distribution to replace the idea of loss functions and regularization.

8.2.5 Further Reading
Due to the fact that the original development of empirical risk minimiza- tion (Vapnik, 1998) was couched in heavily theoretical language, many of the subsequent developments have been theoretical. The area of study
is called statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1999; Evgeniou et al., 2000; statistical learning

Hastie et al., 2001; von Luxburg and Scho¨lkopf, 2011). A recent machine learning textbook that builds on the theoretical foundations and develops efficient learning algorithms is Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David (2014).
  The concept of regularization has its roots in the solution of ill-posed in- verse problems (Neumaier, 1998). The approach presented here is called

theory

Tikhonov regularization, and there is a closely related constrained version	Tikhonov

called Ivanov regularization. Tikhonov regularization has deep relation- ships to the bias-variance trade-off and feature selection (Bu¨hlmann and Van De Geer, 2011). An alternative to cross-validation is bootstrap and jackknife (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993; Davidson and Hinkley, 1997; Hall, 1992).
  Thinking about empirical risk minimization (Section 8.2) as "probabil- ity free" is incorrect. There is an underlying unknown probability distri- bution p(x, y) that governs the data generation. However, the approach of empirical risk minimization is agnostic to that choice of distribution. This is in contrast to standard statistical approaches that explicitly re- quire the knowledge of p(x, y). Furthermore, since the distribution is a joint distribution on both examples x and labels y, the labels can be non- deterministic. In contrast to standard statistics we do not need to specify the noise distribution for the labels y.

8.3 Parameter Estimation
In Section 8.2, we did not explicitly model our problem using probability distributions. In this section, we will see how to use probability distribu- tions to model our uncertainty due to the observation process and our uncertainty in the parameters of our predictors. In Section 8.3.1, we in- troduce the likelihood, which is analogous to the concept of loss functions (Section 8.2.2) in empirical risk minimization. The concept of priors (Sec- tion 8.3.2) is analogous to the concept of regularization (Section 8.2.3).

regularization



8.3.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
The idea behind maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is to define a func-	maximum likelihood

tion of the parameters that enables us to find a model that fits the data

estimation

well. The estimation problem is focused on the likelihood function, or	likelihood
more precisely its negative logarithm. For data represented by a random variable x and for a family of probability densities p(x ?) parametrized
by ?, the negative log-likelihood is given by	negative
log-likelihood

Lx(?) = - log p(x | ?) .	(8.14)
The notation	x(?) emphasizes the fact that the parameter ? is varying and the data x is fixed. We very often drop the reference to x when writing the negative log-likelihood, as it is really a function of ?, and write it as (?) when the random variable representing the uncertainty in the data
is clear from the context.
  Let us interpret what the probability density p(x ?) is modeling for a fixed value of ?. It is a distribution that models the uncertainty of the data for a given parameter setting. For a given dataset x, the likelihood allows us to express preferences about different settings of the parameters ?, and we can choose the setting that more "likely" has generated the data.
  In a complementary view, if we consider the data to be fixed (because it has been observed), and we vary the parameters ?, what does (?) tell us? It tells us how likely a particular setting of ? is for the observations x. Based on this second view, the maximum likelihood estimator gives us the most likely parameter ? for the set of data.
  We consider the supervised learning setting, where we obtain pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) with xn  RD and labels yn  R. We are inter- ested in constructing a predictor that takes a feature vector xn as input and produces a prediction yn (or something close to it), i.e., given a vec- tor xn we want the probability distribution of the label yn. In other words, we specify the conditional probability distribution of the labels given the examples for the particular parameter setting ?.



independent and identically distributed
  
We assume that the set of examples (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). The word "independent" (Section 6.4.5) implies that the likelihood involving the whole dataset (Y = {y1, . . . , yN } and X = {x1, . . . , xN }) factorizes into a product of the likelihoods of

each individual example

N
p(	, ?) =	p(yn  xn, ?) ,	(8.16)
n=1
where p(yn xn, ?) is a particular distribution (which was Gaussian in Ex- ample 8.4). The expression "identically distributed" means that each term in the product (8.16) is of the same distribution, and all of them share the same parameters. It is often easier from an optimization viewpoint to compute functions that can be decomposed into sums of simpler functions.
Hence, in machine learning we often consider the negative log-likelihood  Recall log(ab) =
log(a) + log(b)
N
(?) =	log p(	, ?) =	log p(yn xn, ?) .	(8.17)
n=1
While it is temping to interpret the fact that ? is on the right of the condi- tioning in p(yn xn, ?) (8.15), and hence should be interpreted as observed and fixed, this interpretation is incorrect. The negative log-likelihood (?) is a function of ?. Therefore, to find a good parameter vector ? that explains the data (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) well, minimize the negative log- likelihood L(?) with respect to ?.
Remark. The negative sign in (8.17) is a historical artifact that is due to the convention that we want to maximize likelihood, but numerical optimization literature tends to study minimization of functions.	?


It turns out that for Gaussian likelihoods the resulting optimization



Figure 8.5 For the given data, the maximum likelihood estimate of the parameters results in the black diagonal line. The orange square shows the value of the maximum likelihood prediction at
x = 60.


150

125

100

75

50

25

0
0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80
x


Figure 8.6 Comparing the predictions with the maximum likelihood estimate and the MAP estimate at
x = 60. The prior biases the slope to be less steep and the intercept to be closer to zero. In this example, the bias that moves the intercept closer to zero actually increases the slope.


150

125

100

75

50

25

0
0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	80
x



problem corresponding to maximum likelihood estimation has a closed- form solution. We will see more details on this in Chapter 9. Figure 8.5 shows a regression dataset and the function that is induced by the maxi- mum-likelihood parameters. Maximum likelihood estimation may suffer from overfitting (Section 8.3.3), analogous to unregularized empirical risk minimization (Section 8.2.3). For other likelihood functions, i.e., if we model our noise with non-Gaussian distributions, maximum likelihood es- timation may not have a closed-form analytic solution. In this case, we resort to numerical optimization methods discussed in Chapter 7.

8.3.2 Maximum A Posteriori Estimation
If we have prior knowledge about the distribution of the parameters ?, we can multiply an additional term to the likelihood. This additional term is a prior probability distribution on parameters p(?). For a given prior, after

observing some data x, how should we update the distribution of ?? In other words, how should we represent the fact that we have more specific knowledge of ? after observing data x? Bayes' theorem, as discussed in Section 6.3, gives us a principled tool to update our probability distribu-
tions of random variables. It allows us to compute a posterior distribution	posterior
p(? x) (the more specific knowledge) on the parameters ? from general
prior statements (prior distribution) p(?) and the function p(x ?) that	prior
links the parameters ? and the observed data x (called the likelihood):	likelihood
p(? x) = p(x | ?)p(?) .	(8.19)
p(x)
Recall that we are interested in finding the parameter ? that maximizes the posterior. Since the distribution p(x) does not depend on ?, we can ignore the value of the denominator for the optimization and obtain
                    p(? | x) ? p(x | ?)p(?) .	(8.20)
The preceding proportion relation hides the density of the data p(x), which may be difficult to estimate. Instead of estimating the minimum of the negative log-likelihood, we now estimate the minimum of the neg-
ative log-posterior, which is referred to as maximum a posteriori estima-  maximum a

tion (MAP estimation). An illustration of the effect of adding a zero-mean Gaussian prior is shown in Figure 8.6.

posteriori estimation
MAP estimation




  The idea of including prior knowledge about where good parameters lie is widespread in machine learning. An alternative view, which we saw in Section 8.2.3, is the idea of regularization, which introduces an addi- tional term that biases the resulting parameters to be close to the origin. Maximum a posteriori estimation can be considered to bridge the non- probabilistic and probabilistic worlds as it explicitly acknowledges the need for a prior distribution but it still only produces a point estimate of the parameters.
Remark. The maximum likelihood estimate ?ML possesses the following properties (Lehmann and Casella, 1998; Efron and Hastie, 2016):
Asymptotic consistency: The MLE converges to the true value in the


Figure 8.7 Model fitting. In a parametrized class M? of models, we optimize the model parameters ? to minimize the distance to the true (unknown) model M *.

limit of infinitely many observations, plus a random error that is ap- proximately normal.
The size of the samples necessary to achieve these properties can be quite large.
The error's variance decays in 1/N , where N is the number of data points.
Especially, in the "small" data regime, maximum likelihood estimation can lead to overfitting.
                                                    ?
  The principle of maximum likelihood estimation (and maximum a pos- teriori estimation) uses probabilistic modeling to reason about the uncer- tainty in the data and model parameters. However, we have not yet taken probabilistic modeling to its full extent. In this section, the resulting train- ing procedure still produces a point estimate of the predictor, i.e., training returns one single set of parameter values that represent the best predic- tor. In Section 8.4, we will take the view that the parameter values should also be treated as random variables, and instead of estimating "best" val- ues of that distribution, we will use the full parameter distribution when making predictions.

8.3.3 Model Fitting
Consider the setting where we are given a dataset, and we are interested in fitting a parametrized model to the data. When we talk about "fit- ting", we typically mean optimizing/learning model parameters so that they minimize some loss function, e.g., the negative log-likelihood. With maximum likelihood (Section 8.3.1) and maximum a posteriori estima- tion (Section 8.3.2), we already discussed two commonly used algorithms for model fitting.
  The parametrization of the model defines a model class M? with which we can operate. For example, in a linear regression setting, we may define the relationship between inputs x and (noise-free) observations y to be y = ax + b, where ? := a, b are the model parameters. In this case, the model parameters ? describe the family of affine functions, i.e., straight lines with slope a, which are offset from 0 by b. Assume the data comes


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(a) Overfitting


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(b) Underfitting.


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(c) Fitting well.

Figure 8.8 Fitting (by maximum likelihood) of different model classes to a regression dataset.




from a model M *, which is unknown to us. For a given training dataset, we optimize ? so that M? is as close as possible to M *, where the "close- ness" is defined by the objective function we optimize (e.g., squared loss on the training data). Figure 8.7 illustrates a setting where we have a small model class (indicated by the circle M?), and the data generation model M * lies outside the set of considered models. We begin our parameter search at M? . After the optimization, i.e., when we obtain the best pos- sible parameters ?*, we distinguish three different cases: (i) overfitting,
(ii) underfitting, and (iii) fitting well. We will give a high-level intuition of what these three concepts mean.
Roughly speaking, overfitting refers to the situation where the para-  overfitting
metrized model class is too rich to model the dataset generated by M *, i.e., M? could model much more complicated datasets. For instance, if the dataset was generated by a linear function, and we define M? to be the class of seventh-order polynomials, we could model not only linear func- tions, but also polynomials of degree two, three, etc. Models that over-
fit typically have a large number of parameters. An observation we often  One way to detect

make is that the overly flexible model class M? uses all its modeling power to reduce the training error. If the training data is noisy, it will therefore find some useful signal in the noise itself. This will cause enormous prob- lems when we predict away from the training data. Figure 8.8(a) gives an example of overfitting in the context of regression where the model pa- rameters are learned by means of maximum likelihood (see Section 8.3.1). We will discuss overfitting in regression more in Section 9.2.2.

overfitting in practice is to observe that the model has low training risk but high test risk during cross validation (Section 8.2.4).

When we run into underfitting, we encounter the opposite problem  underfitting
where the model class M? is not rich enough. For example, if our dataset was generated by a sinusoidal function, but ? only parametrizes straight lines, the best optimization procedure will not get us close to the true model. However, we still optimize the parameters and find the best straight line that models the dataset. Figure 8.8(b) shows an example of a model that underfits because it is insufficiently flexible. Models that underfit typ- ically have few parameters.
  The third case is when the parametrized model class is about right. Then, our model fits well, i.e., it neither overfits nor underfits. This means our model class is just rich enough to describe the dataset we are given. Figure 8.8(c) shows a model that fits the given dataset fairly well. Ideally,

this is the model class we would want to work with since it has good generalization properties.
  In practice, we often define very rich model classes M? with many pa- rameters, such as deep neural networks. To mitigate the problem of over- fitting, we can use regularization (Section 8.2.3) or priors (Section 8.3.2). We will discuss how to choose the model class in Section 8.6.


















link function generalized linear model
























generative process
8.3.4 
Further Reading
When considering probabilistic models, the principle of maximum likeli- hood estimation generalizes the idea of least-squares regression for linear models, which we will discuss in detail in Chapter 9. When restricting the predictor to have linear form with an additional nonlinear function f applied to the output, i.e.,
                  p(yn|xn, ?) = f(??xn) ,	(8.21)
we can consider other models for other prediction tasks, such as binary classification or modeling count data (McCullagh and Nelder, 1989). An alternative view of this is to consider likelihoods that are from the ex- ponential family (Section 6.6). The class of models, which have linear dependence between parameters and data, and have potentially nonlin- ear transformation f (called a link function), is referred to as generalized linear models (Agresti, 2002, chapter 4).
  Maximum likelihood estimation has a rich history, and was originally proposed by Sir Ronald Fisher in the 1930s. We will expand upon the idea of a probabilistic model in Section 8.4. One debate among researchers who use probabilistic models, is the discussion between Bayesian and fre- quentist statistics. As mentioned in Section 6.1.1, it boils down to the definition of probability. Recall from Section 6.1 that one can consider probability to be a generalization (by allowing uncertainty) of logical rea- soning (Cheeseman, 1985; Jaynes, 2003). The method of maximum like- lihood estimation is frequentist in nature, and the interested reader is pointed to Efron and Hastie (2016) for a balanced view of both Bayesian and frequentist statistics.
  There are some probabilistic models where maximum likelihood esti- mation may not be possible. The reader is referred to more advanced sta- tistical textbooks, e.g., Casella and Berger (2002), for approaches, such as method of moments, M -estimation, and estimating equations.

8.4 Probabilistic Modeling and Inference
In machine learning, we are frequently concerned with the interpretation and analysis of data, e.g., for prediction of future events and decision making. To make this task more tractable, we often build models that describe the generative process that generates the observed data.

  For example, we can describe the outcome of a coin-flip experiment ("heads" or "tails") in two steps. First, we define a parameter µ, which describes the probability of "heads" as the parameter of a Bernoulli distri- bution (Chapter 6); second, we can sample an outcome x	head, tail from the Bernoulli distribution p(x µ) = Ber(µ). The parameter µ gives rise to a specific dataset	and depends on the coin used. Since µ is un- known in advance and can never be observed directly, we need mecha- nisms to learn something about µ given observed outcomes of coin-flip experiments. In the following, we will discuss how probabilistic modeling can be used for this purpose.

8.4.1 Probabilistic Models	A probabilistic

Probabilistic models represent the uncertain aspects of an experiment as probability distributions. The benefit of using probabilistic models is that they offer a unified and consistent set of tools from probability theory (Chapter 6) for modeling, inference, prediction, and model selection.
  In probabilistic modeling, the joint distribution p(x, ?) of the observed variables x and the hidden parameters ? is of central importance: It en- capsulates information from the following:
The prior and the likelihood (product rule, Section 6.3).
The marginal likelihood p(x), which will play an important role in model selection (Section 8.6), can be computed by taking the joint dis- tribution and integrating out the parameters (sum rule, Section 6.3). The posterior, which can be obtained by dividing the joint by the marginal likelihood.
Only the joint distribution has this property. Therefore, a probabilistic model is specified by the joint distribution of all its random variables.

8.4.2 Bayesian Inference
A key task in machine learning is to take a model and the data to uncover the values of the model's hidden variables ? given the observed variables
x. In Section 8.3.1, we already discussed two ways for estimating model parameters ? using maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori esti- mation. In both cases, we obtain a single-best value for ? so that the key algorithmic problem of parameter estimation is solving an optimization problem. Once these point estimates ?* are known, we use them to make predictions. More specifically, the predictive distribution will be p(x ?*), where we use ?* in the likelihood function.
  As discussed in Section 6.3, focusing solely on some statistic of the pos- terior distribution (such as the parameter ?* that maximizes the poste- rior) leads to loss of information, which can be critical in a system that

model is specified by the joint distribution of all random variables.



















Parameter estimation can be phrased as an optimization problem.



Bayesian inference is about learning the distribution of random variables. Bayesian inference






Bayesian inference inverts the relationship between parameters and the data.

uses the prediction p(x ?*) to make decisions. These decision-making systems typically have different objective functions than the likelihood, a squared-error loss or a mis-classification error. Therefore, having the full posterior distribution around can be extremely useful and leads to more robust decisions. Bayesian inference is about finding this posterior distri- bution (Gelman et al., 2004). For a dataset  , a parameter prior p(?), and a likelihood function, the posterior
p(? | X) = p(X | ?)p(?) ,	p(X) = - p(X | ?)p(?)d? ,	(8.22)
is obtained by applying Bayes' theorem. The key idea is to exploit Bayes' theorem to invert the relationship between the parameters ? and the data (given by the likelihood) to obtain the posterior distribution p(?	).
  The implication of having a posterior distribution on the parameters is that it can be used to propagate uncertainty from the parameters to the data. More specifically, with a distribution p(?) on the parameters our predictions will be
p(x) = - p(x | ?)p(?)d? = E?[p(x | ?)] ,	(8.23)
and they no longer depend on the model parameters ?, which have been marginalized/integrated out. Equation (8.23) reveals that the prediction is an average over all plausible parameter values ?, where the plausibility is encapsulated by the parameter distribution p(?).
  Having discussed parameter estimation in Section 8.3 and Bayesian in- ference here, let us compare these two approaches to learning. Parameter estimation via maximum likelihood or MAP estimation yields a consistent point estimate ?* of the parameters, and the key computational problem to be solved is optimization. In contrast, Bayesian inference yields a (pos- terior) distribution, and the key computational problem to be solved is integration. Predictions with point estimates are straightforward, whereas predictions in the Bayesian framework require solving another integration problem; see (8.23). However, Bayesian inference gives us a principled way to incorporate prior knowledge, account for side information, and incorporate structural knowledge, all of which is not easily done in the context of parameter estimation. Moreover, the propagation of parameter uncertainty to the prediction can be valuable in decision-making systems for risk assessment and exploration in the context of data-efficient learn- ing (Deisenroth et al., 2015; Kamthe and Deisenroth, 2018).
  While Bayesian inference is a mathematically principled framework for learning about parameters and making predictions, there are some prac- tical challenges that come with it because of the integration problems we need to solve; see (8.22) and (8.23). More specifically, if we do not choose a conjugate prior on the parameters (Section 6.6.1), the integrals in (8.22) and (8.23) are not analytically tractable, and we cannot compute the pos-

terior, the predictions, or the marginal likelihood in closed form. In these cases, we need to resort to approximations. Here, we can use stochas- tic approximations, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Gilks et al., 1996), or deterministic approximations, such as the Laplace ap- proximation (Bishop, 2006; Barber, 2012; Murphy, 2012), variational in- ference (Jordan et al., 1999; Blei et al., 2017), or expectation propaga- tion (Minka, 2001a).
  Despite these challenges, Bayesian inference has been successfully ap- plied to a variety of problems, including large-scale topic modeling (Hoff- man et al., 2013), click-through-rate prediction (Graepel et al., 2010), data-efficient reinforcement learning in control systems (Deisenroth et al., 2015), online ranking systems (Herbrich et al., 2007), and large-scale rec- ommender systems. There are generic tools, such as Bayesian optimiza- tion (Brochu et al., 2009; Snoek et al., 2012; Shahriari et al., 2016), that are very useful ingredients for an efficient search of meta parameters of models or algorithms.
Remark. In the machine learning literature, there can be a somewhat ar- bitrary separation between (random) "variables" and "parameters". While parameters are estimated (e.g., via maximum likelihood), variables are usually marginalized out. In this book, we are not so strict with this sep- aration because, in principle, we can place a prior on any parameter and integrate it out, which would then turn the parameter into a random vari- able according to the aforementioned separation.	?

8.4.3 Latent-Variable Models
In practice, it is sometimes useful to have additional latent variables z	latent variable
(besides the model parameters ?) as part of the model (Moustaki et al., 2015). These latent variables are different from the model parameters ? as they do not parametrize the model explicitly. Latent variables may describe the data-generating process, thereby contributing to the inter- pretability of the model. They also often simplify the structure of the model and allow us to define simpler and richer model structures. Sim- plification of the model structure often goes hand in hand with a smaller number of model parameters (Paquet, 2008; Murphy, 2012). Learning in latent-variable models (at least via maximum likelihood) can be done in a principled way using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm (Demp- ster et al., 1977; Bishop, 2006). Examples, where such latent variables are helpful, are principal component analysis for dimensionality reduc- tion (Chapter 10), Gaussian mixture models for density estimation (Chap- ter 11), hidden Markov models (Maybeck, 1979) or dynamical systems (Ghahramani and Roweis, 1999; Ljung, 1999) for time-series modeling, and meta learning and task generalization (Hausman et al., 2018; Sæ- mundsson et al., 2018). Although the introduction of these latent variables

may make the model structure and the generative process easier, learning in latent-variable models is generally hard, as we will see in Chapter 11.
  Since latent-variable models also allow us to define the process that generates data from parameters, let us have a look at this generative pro- cess. Denoting data by x, the model parameters by ? and the latent vari- ables by z, we obtain the conditional distribution
p(x | z, ?)	(8.24)
that allows us to generate data for any model parameters and latent vari- ables. Given that z are latent variables, we place a prior p(z) on them.
  As the models we discussed previously, models with latent variables can be used for parameter learning and inference within the frameworks we discussed in Sections 8.3 and 8.4.2. To facilitate learning (e.g., by means of maximum likelihood estimation or Bayesian inference), we fol- low a two-step procedure. First, we compute the likelihood p(x ?) of the model, which does not depend on the latent variables. Second, we use this likelihood for parameter estimation or Bayesian inference, where we use exactly the same expressions as in Sections 8.3 and 8.4.2, respectively.
  Since the likelihood function p(x ?) is the predictive distribution of the data given the model parameters, we need to marginalize out the latent variables so that






The likelihood is a function of the data and the model parameters, but is independent of the latent variables.
                 
p(x | ?) = - p(x | z, ?)p(z)dz ,	(8.25)
where p(x z, ?) is given in (8.24) and p(z) is the prior on the latent variables. Note that the likelihood must not depend on the latent variables z, but it is only a function of the data x and the model parameters ?.
  The likelihood in (8.25) directly allows for parameter estimation via maximum likelihood. MAP estimation is also straightforward with an ad- ditional prior on the model parameters ? as discussed in Section 8.3.2. Moreover, with the likelihood (8.25) Bayesian inference (Section 8.4.2) in a latent-variable model works in the usual way: We place a prior p(?) on the model parameters and use Bayes' theorem to obtain a posterior distribution

p(?	) = p(X | ?)p(?)
p(X)


(8.26)

over the model parameters given a dataset	. The posterior in (8.26) can be used for predictions within a Bayesian inference framework; see (8.23). One challenge we have in this latent-variable model is that the like- lihood p(	?) requires the marginalization of the latent variables ac- cording to (8.25). Except when we choose a conjugate prior p(z) for p(x z, ?), the marginalization in (8.25) is not analytically tractable, and we need to resort to approximations (Bishop, 2006; Paquet, 2008; Mur-
phy, 2012; Moustaki et al., 2015).

  Similar to the parameter posterior (8.26) we can compute a posterior on the latent variables according to
  p(z | X) = p(X | z)p(z) ,    p(X | z) = - p(X | z, ?)p(?)d? ,  (8.27)
where p(z) is the prior on the latent variables and p(  z) requires us to integrate out the model parameters ?.
  Given the difficulty of solving integrals analytically, it is clear that mar- ginalizing out both the latent variables and the model parameters at the same time is not possible in general (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012). A quantity that is easier to compute is the posterior distribution on the latent variables, but conditioned on the model parameters, i.e.,
p(z	, ?) = p(X | z, ?)p(z) ,	(8.28)
p(X | ?)
where p(z) is the prior on the latent variables and p(  z, ?) is given in (8.24).
  In Chapters 10 and 11, we derive the likelihood functions for PCA and Gaussian mixture models, respectively. Moreover, we compute the poste- rior distributions (8.28) on the latent variables for both PCA and Gaussian mixture models.
Remark. In the following chapters, we may not be drawing such a clear distinction between latent variables z and uncertain model parameters ? and call the model parameters "latent" or "hidden" as well because they are unobserved. In Chapters 10 and 11, where we use the latent variables z, we will pay attention to the difference as we will have two different types of hidden variables: model parameters ? and latent variables z.  ?
  We can exploit the fact that all the elements of a probabilistic model are random variables to define a unified language for representing them. In Section 8.5, we will see a concise graphical language for representing the structure of probabilistic models. We will use this graphical language to describe the probabilistic models in the subsequent chapters.


8.4.4 Further Reading
Probabilistic models in machine learning (Bishop, 2006; Barber, 2012; Murphy, 2012) provide a way for users to capture uncertainty about data and predictive models in a principled fashion. Ghahramani (2015) presents a short review of probabilistic models in machine learning. Given a proba- bilistic model, we may be lucky enough to be able to compute parameters of interest analytically. However, in general, analytic solutions are rare, and computational methods such as sampling (Gilks et al., 1996; Brooks et al., 2011) and variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999; Blei et al.,










probabilistic programming

2017) are used. Moustaki et al. (2015) and Paquet (2008) provide a good overview of Bayesian inference in latent-variable models.
  In recent years, several programming languages have been proposed that aim to treat the variables defined in software as random variables corresponding to probability distributions. The objective is to be able to write complex functions of probability distributions, while under the hood the compiler automatically takes care of the rules of Bayesian inference. This rapidly changing field is called probabilistic programming.






directed graphical
8.5 
Directed Graphical Models
In this section, we introduce a graphical language for specifying a prob- abilistic model, called the directed graphical model. It provides a compact

model	and succinct way to specify probabilistic models, and allows the reader to visually parse dependencies between random variables. A graphical model visually captures the way in which the joint distribution over all random variables can be decomposed into a product of factors depending only on a subset of these variables. In Section 8.4, we identified the joint distri- bution of a probabilistic model as the key quantity of interest because it comprises information about the prior, the likelihood, and the posterior.

Directed graphical models are also known as Bayesian networks.



graphical model



















directed graphical model/Bayesian network

However, the joint distribution by itself can be quite complicated, and it does not tell us anything about structural properties of the probabilis- tic model. For example, the joint distribution p(a, b, c) does not tell us anything about independence relations. This is the point where graphical models come into play. This section relies on the concepts of independence and conditional independence, as described in Section 6.4.5.
  In a graphical model, nodes are random variables. In Figure 8.9(a), the nodes represent the random variables a, b, c. Edges represent probabilistic relations between variables, e.g., conditional probabilities.
Remark. Not every distribution can be represented in a particular choice of graphical model. A discussion of this can be found in Bishop (2006).  ?
Probabilistic graphical models have some convenient properties:
They are a simple way to visualize the structure of a probabilistic model. They can be used to design or motivate new kinds of statistical models. Inspection of the graph alone gives us insight into properties, e.g., con- ditional independence.
Complex computations for inference and learning in statistical models can be expressed in terms of graphical manipulations.

8.5.1 Graph Semantics
Directed graphical models/Bayesian networks are a method for representing conditional dependencies in a probabilistic model. They provide a visual

description of the conditional probabilities, hence, providing a simple lan-
guage for describing complex interdependence. The modular description	With additional

also entails computational simplification. Directed links (arrows) between two nodes (random variables) indicate conditional probabilities. For ex- ample, the arrow between a and b in Figure 8.9(a) gives the conditional probability p(b | a) of b given a.

assumptions, the arrows can be used to indicate causal relationships (Pearl, 2009).
Figure 8.9 Examples of directed graphical models.




(a) Fully connected.	(b) Not fully connected.


  Directed graphical models can be derived from joint distributions if we know something about their factorization.



  In general, we can construct the corresponding directed graphical model from a factorized joint distribution as follows:
1. Create a node for all random variables.
2. For each conditional distribution, we add a directed link (arrow) to the graph from the nodes corresponding to the variables on which the distribution is conditioned.
The graph layout depends on the choice of factorization of the joint dis- tribution.
  We discussed how to get from a known factorization of the joint dis- tribution to the corresponding directed graphical model. Now, we will do









The graph layout depends on the factorization of the joint distribution.

exactly the opposite and describe how to extract the joint distribution of a set of random variables from a given graphical model.


In general, the joint distribution p(x) = p(x1, . . . , xK) is given as

K
p(x) =	p(xk | Pak) ,	(8.31)
k=1
where Pak means "the parent nodes of xk". Parent nodes of xk are nodes that have arrows pointing to xk.
  We conclude this subsection with a concrete example of the coin-flip experiment. Consider a Bernoulli experiment (Example 6.8) where the probability that the outcome x of this experiment is "heads" is
                      p(x | µ) = Ber(µ) .	(8.32) We now repeat this experiment N times and observe outcomes x1, . . . , xN
so that we obtain the joint distribution

N
p(x1, . . . , xN µ) =	p(xn µ) .	(8.33)
n=1
The expression on the right-hand side is a product of Bernoulli distribu- tions on each individual outcome because the experiments are indepen- dent. Recall from Section 6.4.5 that statistical independence means that the distribution factorizes. To write the graphical model down for this set- ting, we make the distinction between unobserved/latent variables and observed variables. Graphically, observed variables are denoted by shaded nodes so that we obtain the graphical model in Figure 8.10(a). We see that the single parameter µ is the same for all xn, n = 1, . . . , N as the outcomes xn are identically distributed. A more compact, but equivalent, graphical model for this setting is given in Figure 8.10(b), where we use

Figure 8.10 Graphical models for a repeated Bernoulli experiment.



(a) Version with xn explicit.
(b) 
Version with plate notation.
(c) 
Hyperparameters a
and ß on the latent µ.



the plate notation. The plate (box) repeats everything inside (in this case,	plate
the observations xn) N times. Therefore, both graphical models are equiv- alent, but the plate notation is more compact. Graphical models immedi-
ately allow us to place a hyperprior on µ. A hyperprior is a second layer	hyperprior
of prior distributions on the parameters of the first layer of priors. Fig- ure 8.10(c) places a Beta(a, ß) prior on the latent variable µ. If we treat a and ß as deterministic parameters, i.e., not random variables, we omit the circle around it.


8.5.2 Conditional Independence and d-Separation
Directed graphical models allow us to find conditional independence (Sec- tion 6.4.5) relationship properties of the joint distribution only by looking
at the graph. A concept called d-separation (Pearl, 1988) is key to this.	d-separation
  Consider a general directed graph in which , , are arbitrary nonin- tersecting sets of nodes (whose union may be smaller than the complete set of nodes in the graph). We wish to ascertain whether a particular con- ditional independence statement, "A is conditionally independent of B given C", denoted by

A ? B | C ,	(8.34)
is implied by a given directed acyclic graph. To do so, we consider all possible trails (paths that ignore the direction of the arrows) from any node in to any nodes in . Any such path is said to be blocked if it includes any node such that either of the following are true:

The arrows on the path meet either head to tail or tail to tail at the node, and the node is in the set C.
The arrows meet head to head at the node, and neither the node nor any of its descendants is in the set C.
If all paths are blocked, then  is said to be d-separated from  by , and the joint distribution over all of the variables in the graph will satisfy A ? B | C.



Figure 8.12 Three types of graphical models: (a) Directed graphical models (Bayesian networks);
(b) Undirected graphical models (Markov random fields); (c) Factor graphs.



(a) Directed graphical model



(b) Undirected	graphical model








(c) Factor graph






Figure 8.11 D-separation example.

















  Directed graphical models allow a compact representation of proba- bilistic models, and we will see examples of directed graphical models in Chapters 9, 10, and 11. The representation, along with the concept of con- ditional independence, allows us to factorize the respective probabilistic models into expressions that are easier to optimize.
  The graphical representation of the probabilistic model allows us to visually see the impact of design choices we have made on the structure of the model. We often need to make high-level assumptions about the structure of the model. These modeling assumptions (hyperparameters) affect the prediction performance, but cannot be selected directly using the approaches we have seen so far. We will discuss different ways to choose the structure in Section 8.6.

8.5.3 Further Reading
An introduction to probabilistic graphical models can be found in Bishop (2006, chapter 8), and an extensive description of the different applica- tions and corresponding algorithmic implications can be found in the book by Koller and Friedman (2009). There are three main types of probabilistic graphical models:
Directed graphical models (Bayesian networks); see Figure 8.12(a) Undirected graphical models (Markov random fields); see Figure 8.12(b) Factor graphs; see Figure 8.12(c)
  Graphical models allow for graph-based algorithms for inference and learning, e.g., via local message passing. Applications range from rank- ing in online games (Herbrich et al., 2007) and computer vision (e.g., image segmentation, semantic labeling, image denoising, image restora- tion (Kittler and Fo¨glein, 1984; Sucar and Gillies, 1994; Shotton et al., 2006; Szeliski et al., 2008)) to coding theory (McEliece et al., 1998), solv- ing linear equation systems (Shental et al., 2008), and iterative Bayesian state estimation in signal processing (Bickson et al., 2007; Deisenroth and Mohamed, 2012).
  One topic that is particularly important in real applications that we do not discuss in this book is the idea of structured prediction (Bakir et al., 2007; Nowozin et al., 2014), which allows machine learning models to tackle predictions that are structured, for example sequences, trees, and graphs. The popularity of neural network models has allowed more flex- ible probabilistic models to be used, resulting in many useful applica- tions of structured models (Goodfellow et al., 2016, chapter 16). In recent years, there has been a renewed interest in graphical models due to their applications to causal inference (Pearl, 2009; Imbens and Rubin, 2015; Peters et al., 2017; Rosenbaum, 2017).









directed graphical model
Bayesian network
undirected graphical model
Markov random field
factor graph



8.6 Model Selection
In machine learning, we often need to make high-level modeling decisions that critically influence the performance of the model. The choices we make (e.g., the functional form of the likelihood) influence the number and type of free parameters in the model and thereby also the flexibility
and expressivity of the model. More complex models are more flexible in  A polynomial

the sense that they can be used to describe more datasets. For instance, a polynomial of degree 1 (a line y = a0 + a1x) can only be used to describe linear relations between inputs x and observations y. A polynomial of degree 2 can additionally describe quadratic relationships between inputs and observations.
  One would now think that very flexible models are generally preferable to simple models because they are more expressive. A general problem

y = a0 +a1x +a2x2 can also describe linear functions by setting a2 = 0, i.e., it is strictly more expressive than a first-order polynomial.


Figure 8.13 Nested cross-validation. We perform two levels of K-fold
cross-validation.



is that at training time we can only use the training set to evaluate the performance of the model and learn its parameters. However, the per- formance on the training set is not really what we are interested in. In Section 8.3, we have seen that maximum likelihood estimation can lead to overfitting, especially when the training dataset is small. Ideally, our model (also) works well on the test set (which is not available at training time). Therefore, we need some mechanisms for assessing how a model generalizes to unseen test data. Model selection is concerned with exactly this problem.











nested
8.6.1 
Nested Cross-Validation
We have already seen an approach (cross-validation in Section 8.2.4) that can be used for model selection. Recall that cross-validation provides an estimate of the generalization error by repeatedly splitting the dataset into training and validation sets. We can apply this idea one more time, i.e., for each split, we can perform another round of cross-validation. This is sometimes referred to as nested cross-validation; see Figure 8.13. The inner

cross-validation	level is used to estimate the performance of a particular choice of model or hyperparameter on a internal validation set. The outer level is used to estimate generalization performance for the best choice of model chosen by the inner loop. We can test different model and hyperparameter choices in the inner loop. To distinguish the two levels, the set used to estimate

test set validation set


The standard error is defined as s ,
K
where K is the
number of experiments and s is the standard deviation of the risk of each experiment.

the generalization performance is often called the test set and the set used for choosing the best model is called the validation set. The inner loop estimates the expected value of the generalization error for a given model (8.39), by approximating it using the empirical error on the validation set, i.e.,
E	 1	(k)	(8.39)
V	K
k=1

where R( M ) is the empirical risk (e.g., root mean square error) on the validation set  for model M . We repeat this procedure for all models and choose the model that performs best. Note that cross-validation not only gives us the expected generalization error, but we can also obtain high- order statistics, e.g., the standard error, an estimate of how uncertain the


Figure 8.14 Bayesian inference embodies Occam's razor. The horizontal axis describes the space of all possible datasets . The evidence (vertical axis) evaluates how well a model predicts available data.  Since p(D | Mi) needs to integrate to 1, we should choose the
D	model with the
C	greatest evidence.
Adapted

mean estimate is. Once the model is chosen, we can evaluate the final performance on the test set.

from MacKay (2003).


8.6.2 Bayesian Model Selection
There are many approaches to model selection, some of which are covered in this section. Generally, they all attempt to trade off model complexity and data fit. We assume that simpler models are less prone to overfitting than complex models, and hence the objective of model selection is to find the simplest model that explains the data reasonably well. This concept is
also known as Occam's razor.	Occam's razor
Remark. If we treat model selection as a hypothesis testing problem, we are looking for the simplest hypothesis that is consistent with the data (Mur- phy, 2012).	?
  One may consider placing a prior on models that favors simpler models. However, it is not necessary to do this: An "automatic Occam's Razor" is quantitatively embodied in the application of Bayesian probability (Smith and Spiegelhalter, 1980; Jefferys and Berger, 1992; MacKay, 1992). Fig- ure 8.14, adapted from MacKay (2003), gives us the basic intuition why complex and very expressive models may turn out to be a less probable
choice for modeling a given dataset D. Let us think of the horizontal axis	These predictions

representing the space of all possible datasets . If we are interested in the posterior probability p(Mi ) of model Mi given the data , we can employ Bayes' theorem. Assuming a uniform prior p(M ) over all mod- els, Bayes' theorem rewards models in proportion to how much they pre- dicted the data that occurred. This prediction of the data given model

are quantified by a normalized probability distribution on , i.e., it needs to integrate/sum to 1.

Mi, p(	Mi), is called the evidence for Mi. A simple model M1 can only	evidence predict a small number of datasets, which is shown by p(	M1); a more powerful model M2 that has, e.g., more free parameters than M1, is able

















Bayesian model

to predict a greater variety of datasets. This means, however, that M2 does not predict the datasets in region C as well as M1. Suppose that equal prior probabilities have been assigned to the two models. Then, if the dataset falls into region C, the less powerful model M1 is the more probable model.
  Earlier in this chapter, we argued that models need to be able to explain the data, i.e., there should be a way to generate data from a given model. Furthermore, if the model has been appropriately learned from the data, then we expect that the generated data should be similar to the empirical data. For this, it is helpful to phrase model selection as a hierarchical inference problem, which allows us to compute the posterior distribution over models.
  Let us consider a finite number of models M = M1, . . . , MK , where each model Mk possesses parameters ?k. In Bayesian model selection, we

selection	place a prior p(M ) on the set of models. The corresponding generative
generative process	process that allows us to generate data from this model is
Figure 8.15

Illustration of the hierarchical generative process in Bayesian model selection. We place a prior p(M ) on the set of models. For each model, there is a distribution
p(? M ) on the
corresponding model parameters, which is used to generate the data D.

Mk ~ p(M )	(8.40)
?k ~ p(? | Mk)	(8.41)
D ~ p(D | ?k)	(8.42)
and illustrated in Figure 8.15. Given a training set	, we apply Bayes' theorem and compute the posterior distribution over models as
                 p(Mk | D) ? p(Mk)p(D | Mk) .	(8.43) Note that this posterior no longer depends on the model parameters ?k
because they have been integrated out in the Bayesian setting since
p(D | Mk) = -  p(D | ?k)p(?k | Mk)d?k ,	(8.44)


where p(?k | Mk) is the prior distribution of the model parameters ?k of








model evidence marginal likelihood

model Mk. The term (8.44) is referred to as the model evidence or marginal likelihood. From the posterior in (8.43), we determine the MAP estimate
M * = arg max p(Mk	) .	(8.45)
Mk

With a uniform prior p(Mk) =  1 , which gives every model equal (prior) probability, determining the MAP estimate over models amounts to pick- ing the model that maximizes the model evidence (8.44).
Remark (Likelihood and Marginal Likelihood). There are some important differences between a likelihood and a marginal likelihood (evidence): While the likelihood is prone to overfitting, the marginal likelihood is typ- ically not as the model parameters have been marginalized out (i.e., we no longer have to fit the parameters). Furthermore, the marginal likeli- hood automatically embodies a trade-off between model complexity and data fit (Occam's razor).	?

8.6.3 Bayes Factors for Model Comparison
Consider the problem of comparing two probabilistic models M1, M2, given a dataset . If we compute the posteriors p(M1  ) and p(M2  ), we can compute the ratio of the posteriors

p(M | D)



p(D | M1)p(M1)



p(M ) p(D | M )

 

p(M	)
..	..,,	..


p(D | M2)p(M2) p(D)

p(M ) p(	M )
.. ..,, .. ..	..,,	..
 

The ratio of the posteriors is also called the posterior odds. The first frac-	posterior odds tion on the right-hand side of (8.46), the prior odds, measures how much	prior odds our prior (initial) beliefs favor M1 over M2. The ratio of the marginal like-
lihoods (second fraction on the right-hand-side) is called the Bayes factor	Bayes factor
and measures how well the data D is predicted by M1 compared to M2.
Remark. The Jeffreys-Lindley paradox states that the "Bayes factor always	Jeffreys-Lindley

favors the simpler model since the probability of the data under a complex model with a diffuse prior will be very small" (Murphy, 2012). Here, a diffuse prior refers to a prior that does not favor specific models, i.e., many models are a priori plausible under this prior.	?
  If we choose a uniform prior over models, the prior odds term in (8.46) is 1, i.e., the posterior odds is the ratio of the marginal likelihoods (Bayes factor)

paradox

p(D | M1) .	(8.47)
p(D | M2)
If the Bayes factor is greater than 1, we choose model M1, otherwise model M2. In a similar way to frequentist statistics, there are guidelines on the size of the ratio that one should consider before "significance" of the result (Jeffreys, 1961).
Remark (Computing the Marginal Likelihood). The marginal likelihood plays an important role in model selection: We need to compute Bayes factors (8.46) and posterior distributions over models (8.43).
  Unfortunately, computing the marginal likelihood requires us to solve an integral (8.44). This integration is generally analytically intractable, and we will have to resort to approximation techniques, e.g., numerical integration (Stoer and Burlirsch, 2002), stochastic approximations using Monte Carlo (Murphy, 2012), or Bayesian Monte Carlo techniques (O'Hagan, 1991; Rasmussen and Ghahramani, 2003).
  However, there are special cases in which we can solve it. In Section 6.6.1, we discussed conjugate models. If we choose a conjugate parameter prior p(?), we can compute the marginal likelihood in closed form. In Chap- ter 9, we will do exactly this in the context of linear regression.	?
  We have seen a brief introduction to the basic concepts of machine learning in this chapter. For the rest of this part of the book we will see

how the three different flavors of learning in Sections 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4 are applied to the four pillars of machine learning (regression, dimensionality reduction, density estimation, and classification).















In parametric models, the number of parameters is often related to the complexity of the model class.





Akaike information criterion






Bayesian
8.6.4 
Further Reading
We mentioned at the start of the section that there are high-level modeling choices that influence the performance of the model. Examples include the following:
The degree of a polynomial in a regression setting The number of components in a mixture model
The network architecture of a (deep) neural network The type of kernel in a support vector machine
The dimensionality of the latent space in PCA
The learning rate (schedule) in an optimization algorithm
Rasmussen and Ghahramani (2001) showed that the automatic Occam's razor does not necessarily penalize the number of parameters in a model, but it is active in terms of the complexity of functions. They also showed that the automatic Occam's razor also holds for Bayesian nonparametric models with many parameters, e.g., Gaussian processes.
  If we focus on the maximum likelihood estimate, there exist a number of heuristics for model selection that discourage overfitting. They are called information criteria, and we choose the model with the largest value. The Akaike information criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1974)
                      log p(x | ?) - M	(8.48)
corrects for the bias of the maximum likelihood estimator by addition of a penalty term to compensate for the overfitting of more complex models with lots of parameters. Here, M is the number of model parameters. The AIC estimates the relative information lost by a given model.
The Bayesian information criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978)

information
criterion	log p(x) = log

p(x | ?)p(?)d? ˜ log p(x | ?) -

1 M log N	(8.49)
2

can be used for exponential family distributions. Here, N is the number of data points and M is the number of parameters. BIC penalizes model complexity more heavily than AIC.




9


Linear Regression




In the following, we will apply the mathematical concepts from Chap- ters 2, 5, 6, and 7 to solve linear regression (curve fitting) problems. In
regression, we aim to find a function f that maps inputs x	RD to corre-	regression
sponding function values f (x)  R. We assume we are given a set of train- ing inputs xn and corresponding noisy observations yn = f (xn)+?, where ? is an i.i.d. random variable that describes measurement/observation noise and potentially unmodeled processes (which we will not consider further in this chapter). Throughout this chapter, we assume zero-mean Gaussian noise. Our task is to find a function that not only models the training data, but generalizes well to predicting function values at input locations that are not part of the training data (see Chapter 8). An il- lustration of such a regression problem is given in Figure 9.1. A typical regression setting is given in Figure 9.1(a): For some input values xn, we observe (noisy) function values yn = f (xn) + ?. The task is to infer the function f that generated the data and generalizes well to function values at new input locations. A possible solution is given in Figure 9.1(b), where we also show three distributions centered at the function values f (x) that represent the noise in the data.
  Regression is a fundamental problem in machine learning, and regres- sion problems appear in a diverse range of research areas and applica-




0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4



-4	-2	0	2	4



0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4



-4	-2	0	2	4

Figure 9.1
(a) Dataset;
(b) possible solution to the regression problem.

	

(a) Regression problem: observed noisy func- tion values from which we wish to infer the underlying function that generated the data.
(b) 
Regression solution: possible function that could have generated the data (blue) with indication of the measurement noise of the function value at the corresponding in- puts (orange distributions).


289
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.












Normally, the type of noise could also be a "model choice", but we fix the noise to be Gaussian in this chapter.

tions, including time-series analysis (e.g., system identification), control and robotics (e.g., reinforcement learning, forward/inverse model learn- ing), optimization (e.g., line searches, global optimization), and deep- learning applications (e.g., computer games, speech-to-text translation, image recognition, automatic video annotation). Regression is also a key ingredient of classification algorithms. Finding a regression function re- quires solving a variety of problems, including the following:
Choice of the model (type) and the parametrization of the regres- sion function. Given a dataset, what function classes (e.g., polynomi- als) are good candidates for modeling the data, and what particular parametrization (e.g., degree of the polynomial) should we choose? Model selection, as discussed in Section 8.6, allows us to compare var- ious models to find the simplest model that explains the training data reasonably well.
Finding good parameters. Having chosen a model of the regression function, how do we find good model parameters? Here, we will need to look at different loss/objective functions (they determine what a "good" fit is) and optimization algorithms that allow us to minimize this loss. Overfitting and model selection. Overfitting is a problem when the regression function fits the training data "too well" but does not gen- eralize to unseen test data. Overfitting typically occurs if the underly- ing model (or its parametrization) is overly flexible and expressive; see Section 8.6. We will look at the underlying reasons and discuss ways to mitigate the effect of overfitting in the context of linear regression.
Relationship between loss functions and parameter priors. Loss func- tions (optimization objectives) are often motivated and induced by prob- abilistic models. We will look at the connection between loss functions and the underlying prior assumptions that induce these losses.
Uncertainty modeling. In any practical setting, we have access to only a finite, potentially large, amount of (training) data for selecting the model class and the corresponding parameters. Given that this finite amount of training data does not cover all possible scenarios, we may want to describe the remaining parameter uncertainty to obtain a mea- sure of confidence of the model's prediction at test time; the smaller the training set, the more important uncertainty modeling. Consistent mod- eling of uncertainty equips model predictions with confidence bounds.
  In the following, we will be using the mathematical tools from Chap- ters 3, 5, 6 and 7 to solve linear regression problems. We will discuss maximum likelihood and maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation to find optimal model parameters. Using these parameter estimates, we will have a brief look at generalization errors and overfitting. Toward the end of this chapter, we will discuss Bayesian linear regression, which allows us to reason about model parameters at a higher level, thereby removing some of the problems encountered in maximum likelihood and MAP estimation.

9.1 Problem Formulation	291
9.1 Problem Formulation
Because of the presence of observation noise, we will adopt a probabilis- tic approach and explicitly model the noise using a likelihood function. More specifically, throughout this chapter, we consider a regression prob- lem with the likelihood function
                 p(y | x) = N y | f (x), s2 .	(9.1)
Here, x  RD are inputs and y  R are noisy function values (targets).
With (9.1), the functional relationship between x and y is given as
y = f (x) + ? ,	(9.2)
where ?	0, s2 is independent, identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaus- sian measurement noise with mean 0 and variance s2. Our objective is to find a function that is close (similar) to the unknown function f that generated the data and that generalizes well.
  In this chapter, we focus on parametric models, i.e., we choose a para- metrized function and find parameters ? that "work well" for modeling the data. For the time being, we assume that the noise variance s2 is known and focus on learning the model parameters ?. In linear regression, we consider the special case that the parameters ? appear linearly in our model. An example of linear regression is given by
p(y | x, ?) = N(y | x??, s2)	(9.3)
where ?	RD are the parameters we seek. The class of functions de- scribed by (9.4) are straight lines that pass through the origin. In (9.4),
we chose a parametrization f (x) = x??.	A Dirac delta (delta

  The likelihood in (9.3) is the probability density function of y evalu- ated at x??. Note that the only source of uncertainty originates from the observation noise (as x and ? are assumed known in (9.3)). Without ob- servation noise, the relationship between x and y would be deterministic and (9.3) would be a Dirac delta.

function) is zero everywhere except at a single point, and its integral is 1. It can be considered a Gaussian in the limit of s2 ? 0. likelihood







  The linear regression model in (9.3)-(9.4) is not only linear in the pa- rameters, but also linear in the inputs x. Figure 9.2(a) shows examples of such functions. We will see later that y = ??(x)? for nonlinear trans- formations ? is also a linear regression model because "linear regression"


Linear regression refers to models that are linear in the parameters.

Figure 9.2 Linear regression example.
(a) Example functions that fall into this category;
(b) training set;
(c) maximum likelihood estimate.

20


0


-20  10	0	10
x
(a) Example functions (straight lines) that can be described us- ing the linear model in (9.4).



10

0


-10
-10	-5	0	5	10

(b) Training set.



10

0

-10
-10	-5	0	5	10

(c) Maximum likelihood esti- mate.



refers to models that are "linear in the parameters", i.e., models that de- scribe a function by a linear combination of input features. Here, a "fea- ture" is a representation ?(x) of the inputs x.
  In the following, we will discuss in more detail how to find good pa- rameters ? and how to evaluate whether a parameter set "works well". For the time being, we assume that the noise variance s2 is known.






training set
Figure 9.3 Probabilistic graphical model for linear regression. Observed random variables are shaded,
9.2 
Parameter Estimation
Consider the linear regression setting (9.4) and assume we are given a training set	:=	(x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) consisting of N inputs xn RD and corresponding observations/targets yn	R, n = 1, . . . , N . The corresponding graphical model is given in Figure 9.3. Note that yi and yj are conditionally independent given their respective inputs xi, xj so that the likelihood factorizes according to
p(Y | X , ?) = p(y1, . . . , yN | x1, . . . , xN , ?)	(9.5a)

deterministic/	N	N

known values are without circles.

= IT p(yn | xn, ?) = IT N(yn | x??, s2) ,	(9.5b)

n=1	n=1

where we defined X := {x , . . . , x } and Y := {y , . . . , y } as the sets
s of training inputs and corresponding targets, respectively. The likelihood and the factors p(yn xn, ?) are Gaussian due to the noise distribution; see (9.3).
  In the following, we will discuss how to find optimal parameters ?* RD for the linear regression model (9.4). Once the parameters ?* are found, we can predict function values by using this parameter estimate in (9.4) so that at an arbitrary test input x* the distribution of the corre- sponding target y* is
p(y	x , ?*) =	y	x??*, s2 .	(9.6)
*
In the following, we will have a look at parameter estimation by maxi- mizing the likelihood, a topic that we already covered to some degree in Section 8.3.

9.2.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
A widely used approach to finding the desired parameters ?ML is maximum	maximum likelihood

likelihood estimation, where we find parameters ?ML that maximize the

estimation

likelihood (9.5b). Intuitively, maximizing the likelihood means maximiz-	Maximizing the

ing the predictive distribution of the training data given the model param- eters. We obtain the maximum likelihood parameters as
?ML ? arg max p(Y | X , ?) .	(9.7)
Remark. The likelihood p(y x, ?) is not a probability distribution in ?: It is simply a function of the parameters ? but does not integrate to 1 (i.e., it is unnormalized), and may not even be integrable with respect to ?. However, the likelihood in (9.7) is a normalized probability distribution in y.	?
  To find the desired parameters ?ML that maximize the likelihood, we typically perform gradient ascent (or gradient descent on the negative

likelihood means maximizing the predictive distribution of the (training) data given the parameters.
The likelihood is not a probability distribution in the parameters.

likelihood). In the case of linear regression we consider here, however,	Since the logarithm

a closed-form solution exists, which makes iterative gradient descent un- necessary. In practice, instead of maximizing the likelihood directly, we apply the log-transformation to the likelihood function and minimize the negative log-likelihood.
Remark (Log-Transformation). Since the likelihood (9.5b) is a product of N Gaussian distributions, the log-transformation is useful since (a) it does not suffer from numerical underflow, and (b) the differentiation rules will turn out simpler. More specifically, numerical underflow will be a prob- lem when we multiply N probabilities, where N is the number of data points, since we cannot represent very small numbers, such as 10-256. Furthermore, the log-transform will turn the product into a sum of log- probabilities such that the corresponding gradient is a sum of individual gradients, instead of a repeated application of the product rule (5.46) to compute the gradient of a product of N terms.	?
  To find the optimal parameters ?ML of our linear regression problem, we minimize the negative log-likelihood

is a (strictly) monotonically increasing function, the optimum of a function f is identical to the optimum of log f .


N	N
- log p(Y | X , ?) = - log IT p(yn | xn, ?) = - L log p(yn | xn, ?) , (9.8)

where we exploited that the likelihood (9.5b) factorizes over the number of data points due to our independence assumption on the training set.
  In the linear regression model (9.4), the likelihood is Gaussian (due to the Gaussian additive noise term), such that we arrive at


log p(yn

| xn

 1 
, ?) = - 2s2 (yn

- x??)2 + const ,	(9.9)

where the constant includes all terms independent of ?. Using (9.9) in the

negative log-likelihood (9.8), we obtain (ignoring the constant terms)


N
(?) :=	(yn
n=1

- x??)2	(9.10a)

=  1  (y - X?)?(y - X?) =  1  ?y - X??2 ,	(9.10b)


The negative log-likelihood function is also
called error function.
design matrix

where we define the design matrix X := [x1, . . . , xN ]?  RN×D as the collection of training inputs and y := [y1, . . . , yN ]?  RN as a vector that collects all training targets. Note that the nth row in the design matrix X corresponds to the training input xn. In (9.10b), we used the fact that the

The squared error is often used as a measure of distance. Recall from
Section 3.1 that
?x?2 = x?x if we

sum of squared errors between the observations yn and the corresponding model prediction xn?? equals the squared distance between y and X?.
With (9.10b), we have now a concrete form of the negative log-likelihood
function we need to optimize. We immediately see that (9.10b) is quadratic in ?. This means that we can find a unique global solution ?ML for mini- mizing the negative log-likelihood . We can find the global optimum by

choose the dot
product as the inner product.

computing the gradient of	, settinLg it to 0 and solving for ?.
  Using the results from Chapter 5, we compute the gradient of	with respect to the parameters as
dL =  d  (  1  (y - X?)?(y - X?)i	(9.11a)

=  1	d   y?y	2y?X? + ??X?X?	(9.11b)
2s2 d?
=  1 (  y?X + ??X?X)	R1×D .	(9.11c)
s2
The maximum likelihood estimator ?ML solves dL = 0? (necessary opti-

Ignoring the possibility of duplicate data points, rk(X) = D if N ? D, i.e., we do not have more parameters than data points.

mality condition) and we obtain
dL = 0? (9.11c) ?? X?X = y?X	(9.12a)
d?
?? ??ML = y?X(X?X)-1	(9.12b)
??  ?ML = (X?X)-1X?y .	(9.12c)
We could right-multiply the first equation by (X?X)-1 because X?X is positive definite if rk(X) = D, where rk(X) denotes the rank of X.
Remark. Setting the gradient to 0? is a necessary and sufficient condition, and we obtain a global minimum since the Hessian ?2 L(?) = X?X ? RD×D is positive definite.	?
Remark. The maximum likelihood solution in (9.12c) requires us to solve
a system of linear equations of the form A? = b with A = (X?X) and
b = X?y.	?




Maximum Likelihood Estimation with Features
So far, we considered the linear regression setting described in (9.4), which allowed us to fit straight lines to data using maximum likelihood
estimation. However, straight lines are not sufficiently expressive when it	Linear regression

comes to fitting more interesting data. Fortunately, linear regression offers us a way to fit nonlinear functions within the linear regression framework: Since "linear regression" only refers to "linear in the parameters", we can perform an arbitrary nonlinear transformation ?(x) of the inputs x and then linearly combine the components of this transformation. The corre- sponding linear regression model is
p(y | x, ?) = N(y | ??(x)?, s2)

refers to "linear-in- the-parameters" regression models, but the inputs can undergo any nonlinear transformation.

K-1
?? y = ??(x)? + ? =	?k?k(x) + ? ,
k=0

(9.13)

where ? : RD	RK is a (nonlinear) transformation of the inputs x and
?k : RD	R is the kth component of the feature vector ?. Note that the	feature vector
model parameters ? still appear only linearly.









feature matrix design matrix
  
Let us now have a look at maximum likelihood estimation of the param- eters ? in the linear regression model (9.13). We consider training inputs xn RD and targets yn R, n = 1, . . . , N , and define the feature matrix (design matrix) as

? ??(x ) ?

? ?0(x1)	· · ·	?K-1(x1)  ?

. 1	? ?0(x2)	· · ·	?K-1(x2)  ?

F := ??

.
??(x

?? = ??	.

? ? RN×K ,	(9.16)


where Fij = ?j(xi) and ?j : RD ? R.













maximum likelihood estimate
  
With the feature matrix F defined in (9.16), the negative log-likelihood for the linear regression model (9.13) can be written as
     - log p(Y | X , ?) =  1  (y - F?)?(y - F?) + const .	(9.18)
Comparing (9.18) with the negative log-likelihood in (9.10b) for the "fea- ture-free" model, we immediately see we just need to replace X with F. Since both X and F are independent of the parameters ? that we wish to optimize, we arrive immediately at the maximum likelihood estimate
?ML = (F?F)-1F?y	(9.19)
for the linear regression problem with nonlinear features defined in (9.13).
Remark. When we were working without features, we required X?X to be invertible, which is the case when rk(X) = D, i.e., the columns of X

are linearly independent. In (9.19), we therefore require F?F ? RK×K
to be invertible. This is the case if and only if rk(F) = K.	?





Figure 9.4 Polynomial regression:
(a) dataset consisting of (xn, yn) pairs, n = 1, . . . , 10;
(b) maximum likelihood polynomial of degree 4.












Estimating the Noise Variance
Thus far, we assumed that the noise variance s2 is known. However, we can also use the principle of maximum likelihood estimation to obtain the
maximum likelihood estimator s2 for the noise variance. To do this, we
follow the standard procedure: We write down the log-likelihood, com- pute its derivative with respect to s2 > 0, set it to 0, and solve. The log-likelihood is given by

N
log p(	, ?, s2) =	log	yn  ??(xn)?, s2	(9.20a)
n=1



=
n=1

(- 1

log(2p) -

1
log s2
2

1


2s2

(yn - ??(xn)?)2i


(9.20b)

= - N log s2 -  1  L(y  - ??(x )?)2 + const .	(9.20c)
..	=..,,:s	..

The partial derivative of the log-likelihood with respect to s2 is then
? log p(Y | X , ?, s2)	N	1
?s2	= - 2s2 + 2s4 s = 0	(9.21a)
N	s
?? 2s2 = 2s4	(9.21b)
so that we identify

2
ML	N

1 N
=	(yn
n=1

- ??(xn


)?)2 .	(9.22)

Therefore, the maximum likelihood estimate of the noise variance is the empirical mean of the squared distances between the noise-free function values ??(xn)? and the corresponding noisy observations yn at input lo- cations xn.













root mean square
9.2.2 
Overfitting in Linear Regression
We just discussed how to use maximum likelihood estimation to fit lin- ear models (e.g., polynomials) to data. We can evaluate the quality of the model by computing the error/loss incurred. One way of doing this is to compute the negative log-likelihood (9.10b), which we minimized to determine the maximum likelihood estimator. Alternatively, given that the noise parameter s2 is not a free model parameter, we can ignore the scaling by 1/s2, so that we end up with a squared-error-loss function
?y - F?? . Instead of using this squared loss, we often use the root mean

error	square error (RMSE)
RMSE


1
N ?y - F??

= 1I  1

nL=1


(yn - ??


(xn)?)2 ,	(9.23)



The RMSE is

which (a) allows us to compare errors of datasets with different sizes and (b) has the same scale and the same units as the observed func-

normalized.	tion values yn. For example, if we fit a model that maps post-codes (x is given in latitude, longitude) to house prices (y-values are EUR) then the RMSE is also measured in EUR, whereas the squared error is given

The negative log-likelihood is unitless.

in EUR2. If we choose to include the factor s2 from the original negative log-likelihood (9.10b), then we end up with a unitless objective, i.e., in the preceding example, our objective would no longer be in EUR or EUR2. For model selection (see Section 8.6), we can use the RMSE (or the negative log-likelihood) to determine the best degree of the polynomial by finding the polynomial degree M that minimizes the objective. Given that the polynomial degree is a natural number, we can perform a brute-force search and enumerate all (reasonable) values of M . For a training set of size N it is sufficient to test 0 ? M ? N	1. For M < N , the maximum likelihood estimator is unique. For M ? N , we have more parameters


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(a) M = 0


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(b) M = 1


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

(c) M = 3

Figure 9.5 Maximum likelihood fits for different polynomial degrees M .



4	4	4

2	2	2


0

-2

-4
4	2	0	2	4
x

(d) M = 4


0

-2

-4
4	2	0	2	4
x

(e) M = 6


0

-2

-4
4	2	0	2	4
x

(f) M = 9



than data points, and would need to solve an underdetermined system of linear equations (F?F in (9.19) would also no longer be invertible) so that there are infinitely many possible maximum likelihood estimators.
  Figure 9.5 shows a number of polynomial fits determined by maximum likelihood for the dataset from Figure 9.4(a) with N = 10 observations. We notice that polynomials of low degree (e.g., constants (M = 0) or linear (M = 1)) fit the data poorly and, hence, are poor representations of the true underlying function. For degrees M = 3, . . . , 6, the fits look
plausible and smoothly interpolate the data. When we go to higher-degree  The case of

polynomials, we notice that they fit the data better and better. In the ex- treme case of M = N 1 = 9, the function will pass through every single data point. However, these high-degree polynomials oscillate wildly and are a poor representation of the underlying function that generated the data, such that we suffer from overfitting.
  Remember that the goal is to achieve good generalization by making accurate predictions for new (unseen) data. We obtain some quantita- tive insight into the dependence of the generalization performance on the polynomial of degree M by considering a separate test set comprising 200 data points generated using exactly the same procedure used to generate the training set. As test inputs, we chose a linear grid of 200 points in the interval of [ 5, 5]. For each choice of M , we evaluate the RMSE (9.23) for both the training data and the test data.
  Looking now at the test error, which is a qualitive measure of the gen- eralization properties of the corresponding polynomial, we notice that ini- tially the test error decreases; see Figure 9.6 (orange). For fourth-order polynomials, the test error is relatively low and stays relatively constant up to degree 5. However, from degree 6 onward the test error increases signif- icantly, and high-order polynomials have very bad generalization proper- ties. In this particular example, this also is evident from the corresponding

M = N	1 is extreme in the sense that otherwise the null space of the corresponding system of linear equations would be non-trivial, and we would have infinitely many optimal solutions to the linear regression problem.
overfitting
Note that the noise variance s2 > 0.


Figure 9.6 Training	10
and test error.
8
6
4
2
0  0	2	4	6	8	10
Degree of polynomial

training error
test error

maximum likelihood fits in Figure 9.5. Note that the training error (blue curve in Figure 9.6) never increases when the degree of the polynomial in- creases. In our example, the best generalization (the point of the smallest test error) is obtained for a polynomial of degree M = 4.


















maximum a posteriori MAP


9.2.3 Maximum A Posteriori Estimation
We just saw that maximum likelihood estimation is prone to overfitting. We often observe that the magnitude of the parameter values becomes relatively large if we run into overfitting (Bishop, 2006).
  To mitigate the effect of huge parameter values, we can place a prior distribution p(?) on the parameters. The prior distribution explicitly en- codes what parameter values are plausible (before having seen any data). For example, a Gaussian prior p(?) =  0, 1 on a single parameter ? encodes that parameter values are expected lie in the interval [ 2, 2] (two standard deviations around the mean value). Once a dataset ,
is available, instead of maximizing the likelihood we seek parameters that maximize the posterior distribution p(? , ). This procedure is called maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation.
  The posterior over the parameters ?, given the training data , , is obtained by applying Bayes' theorem (Section 6.3) as
p(?	,	) = p(Y | X , ?)p(?) .	(9.24)
p(Y | X)
Since the posterior explicitly depends on the parameter prior p(?), the prior will have an effect on the parameter vector we find as the maximizer of the posterior. We will see this more explicitly in the following. The parameter vector ?MAP that maximizes the posterior (9.24) is the MAP estimate.
  To find the MAP estimate, we follow steps that are similar in flavor to maximum likelihood estimation. We start with the log-transform and compute the log-posterior as
log p(? | X , Y) = log p(Y | X , ?) + log p(?) + const ,	(9.25)

where the constant comprises the terms that are independent of ?. We see that the log-posterior in (9.25) is the sum of the log-likelihood p(  , ?) and the log-prior log p(?) so that the MAP estimate will be a "compromise" between the prior (our suggestion for plausible parameter values before observing data) and the data-dependent likelihood.
  To find the MAP estimate ?MAP, we minimize the negative log-posterior distribution with respect to ?, i.e., we solve
           ?MAP ? arg min{- log p(Y | X , ?) - log p(?)} .	(9.26) The gradient of the negative log-posterior with respect to ? is
-d log p(? | X , Y) = -d log p(Y | X , ?) - d log p(?) ,	(9.27)

where we identify the first term on the right-hand side as the gradient of the negative log-likelihood from (9.11c).
  With a (conjugate) Gaussian prior p(?) =  0, b2I on the parameters ?, the negative log-posterior for the linear regression setting (9.13), we obtain the negative log posterior
- log p(? | X , Y) =  1  (y - F?)?(y - F?) +  1  ??? + const . (9.28)

Here, the first term corresponds to the contribution from the log-likelihood, and the second term originates from the log-prior. The gradient of the log- posterior with respect to the parameters ? is then
-d log p(? | X , Y) =  1 (??F?F - y?F) +  1 ?? .	(9.29)

We will find the MAP estimate ?MAP by setting this gradient to 0? and solving for ?MAP. We obtain
 1 (??F?F - y?F) +  1 ?? = 0?	(9.30a)
?? ?? (  1 F?F +  1 Ii -  1 y?F = 0?	(9.30b)

s2
? ( ?

b2	s2
s2 i	?

?? ?

F F +	I
b2
(

= y  F	(9.30c)
s2 i-1




so that the MAP estimate is (by transposing both sides of the last equality)	F?F is symmetric,
positive semi


?MAP =

s2
F F +	I
b2

i-1


F?y .	(9.31)


definite. The additional term
in (9.31) is strictly

Comparing the MAP estimate in (9.31) with the maximum likelihood es- timate in (9.19), we see that the only difference between both solutions is the additional term s2 I in the inverse matrix. This term ensures that

positive definite so that the inverse exists.

F?F + s2 I is symmetric and strictly positive definite (i.e., its inverse exists and the MAP estimate is the unique solution of a system of linear equations). Moreover, it reflects the impact of the regularizer.













Figure 9.7 Polynomial regression: maximum likelihood and MAP estimates.
(a) Polynomials of degree 6;
(b) polynomials of degree 8.












regularization
regularized least squares
9.2.4 
MAP Estimation as Regularization
Instead of placing a prior distribution on the parameters ?, it is also pos- sible to mitigate the effect of overfitting by penalizing the amplitude of the parameter by means of regularization. In regularized least squares, we consider the loss function
?y - F?? + ? ???  ,	(9.32)



data-fit term

which we minimize with respect to ? (see Section 8.2.3). Here, the first term is a data-fit term (also called misfit term), which is proportional to

misfit term	the negative log-likelihood; see (9.10b). The second term is called the

regularizer
regularization parameter

regularizer, and the regularization parameter ? ? 0 controls the "strict- ness" of the regularization.
Remark. Instead of the Euclidean norm	2, we can choose any p-norm p in (9.32). In practice, smaller values for p lead to sparser solutions. Here, "sparse" means that many parameter values ?d = 0, which is also

useful for variable selection. For p = 1, the regularizer is called LASSO	LASSO
(least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) and was proposed by Tib- shirani (1996).	?
  The regularizer ? ? 2 in (9.32) can be interpreted as a negative log- Gaussian prior, which we use in MAP estimation; see (9.26). More specif- ically, with a Gaussian prior p(?) =  0, b2I , we obtain the negative log-Gaussian prior
1	2
                  - log p(?) = 2b2 ???2 + const	(9.33)
so that for ? =  1  the regularization term and the negative log-Gaussian prior are identical.
  Given that the regularized least-squares loss function in (9.32) consists of terms that are closely related to the negative log-likelihood plus a neg- ative log-prior, it is not surprising that, when we minimize this loss, we obtain a solution that closely resembles the MAP estimate in (9.31). More specifically, minimizing the regularized least-squares loss function yields
?RLS = (F?F + ?I)-1F?y ,	(9.34)
which is identical to the MAP estimate in (9.31) for ? = s2 , where s2 is the noise variance and b2 the variance of the (isotropic) Gaussian prior
p(?) = N(0, b2I).	A point estimate is a

So far, we have covered parameter estimation using maximum likeli-
hood and MAP estimation where we found point estimates ?* that op- timize an objective function (likelihood or posterior). We saw that both maximum likelihood and MAP estimation can lead to overfitting. In the next section, we will discuss Bayesian linear regression, where we use Bayesian inference (Section 8.4) to find a posterior distribution over the unknown parameters, which we subsequently use to make predictions. More specifically, for predictions we will average over all plausible sets of parameters instead of focusing on a point estimate.

single specific
parameter value, unlike a distribution over plausible parameter settings.


9.3 Bayesian Linear Regression
Previously, we looked at linear regression models where we estimated the model parameters ?, e.g., by means of maximum likelihood or MAP esti- mation. We discovered that MLE can lead to severe overfitting, in particu- lar, in the small-data regime. MAP addresses this issue by placing a prior
on the parameters that plays the role of a regularizer.	Bayesian linear

  Bayesian linear regression pushes the idea of the parameter prior a step further and does not even attempt to compute a point estimate of the parameters, but instead the full posterior distribution over the parameters is taken into account when making predictions. This means we do not fit any parameters, but we compute a mean over all plausible parameters settings (according to the posterior).

regression

9.3.1 Model
In Bayesian linear regression, we consider the model prior	p(?) = N m0, S0 ,
likelihood	p(y | x, ?) = N(y | ??(x)?, s2) ,





(9.35)

Figure 9.8 Graphical model for Bayesian linear regression.
m0	S0

s

where we now explicitly place a Gaussian prior p(?) =  m0, S0 on ?, which turns the parameter vector into a random variable. This allows us to write down the corresponding graphical model in Figure 9.8, where we made the parameters of the Gaussian prior on ? explicit. The full proba- bilistic model, i.e., the joint distribution of observed and unobserved ran- dom variables, y and ?, respectively, is
p(y, ? | x) = p(y | x, ?)p(?) .	(9.36)

x
9.3.2 Prior Predictions
In practice, we are usually not so much interested in the parameter values ? themselves. Instead, our focus often lies in the predictions we make with those parameter values. In a Bayesian setting, we take the parameter distribution and average over all plausible parameter settings when we make predictions. More specifically, to make predictions at an input x*, we integrate out ? and obtain
     p(y* | x*) = - p(y* | x*, ?)p(?)d? = E?[p(y* | x*, ?)] ,	(9.37)
which we can interpret as the average prediction of y* x*, ? for all plau- sible parameters ? according to the prior distribution p(?). Note that pre- dictions using the prior distribution only require us to specify the input x*, but no training data.
  In our model (9.35), we chose a conjugate (Gaussian) prior on ? so that the predictive distribution is Gaussian as well (and can be computed in closed form): With the prior distribution p(?) =  m0, S0 , we obtain the predictive distribution as
p(y* | x*) = N  ??(x*)m0, ??(x*)S0?(x*) + s2  ,	(9.38)
where we exploited that (i) the prediction is Gaussian due to conjugacy (see Section 6.6) and the marginalization property of Gaussians (see Sec- tion 6.5), (ii) the Gaussian noise is independent so that
V[y*] = V?[??(x*)?] + V?[?] ,	(9.39)
and (iii) y* is a linear transformation of ? so that we can apply the rules for computing the mean and covariance of the prediction analytically by using (6.50) and (6.51), respectively. In (9.38), the term ??(x*)S0?(x*) in the predictive variance explicitly accounts for the uncertainty associated

with the parameters ?, whereas s2 is the uncertainty contribution due to the measurement noise.
If we are interested in predicting noise-free function values f (x*) =
??(x*)? instead of the noise-corrupted targets y* we obtain
         p(f (x*)) = N  ??(x*)m0, ??(x*)S0?(x*)  ,	(9.40)
which only differs from (9.38) in the omission of the noise variance s2 in the predictive variance.
Remark (Distribution over Functions). Since we can represent the distri-	The parameter

bution p(?) using a set of samples ?i and every sample ?i gives rise to a function fi(·) = ?i??(·), it follows that the parameter distribution p(?) induces a distribution p(f (·)) over functions. Here we use the notation (·) to explicitly denote a functional relationship.	?

distribution p(?) induces a distribution over functions.




Figure 9.9 Prior over functions.
(a) Distribution over functions represented by the mean function (black line) and the marginal uncertainties (shaded), representing the 67% and 95% confidence bounds, respectively;
(b) samples from the prior over functions, which are induced by the samples from the parameter prior.









  So far, we looked at computing predictions using the parameter prior p(?). However, when we have a parameter posterior (given some train- ing data , ), the same principles for prediction and inference hold as in (9.37) - we just need to replace the prior p(?) with the posterior

p(?	,	). In the following, we will derive the posterior distribution in detail before using it to make predictions.


















marginal likelihood
9.3.3 
Posterior Distribution
Given a training set of inputs xn RD and corresponding observations yn  R, n = 1, . . . , N , we compute the posterior over the parameters using Bayes' theorem as
p(?	,	) = p(Y | X , ?)p(?) ,	(9.41)
p(Y | X)
where is the set of training inputs and the collection of correspond- ing training targets. Furthermore, p(  , ?) is the likelihood, p(?) the parameter prior, and
       p(Y | X) = - p(Y | X , ?)p(?)d? = E?[p(Y | X , ?)]	(9.42) the marginal likelihood/evidence, which is independent of the parameters

evidence	? and ensures that the posterior is normalized, i.e., it integrates to 1. We

The marginal likelihood is the expected likelihood under the parameter prior.

can think of the marginal likelihood as the likelihood averaged over all possible parameter settings (with respect to the prior distribution p(?)).
Theorem 9.1 (Parameter Posterior). In our model (9.35), the parameter posterior (9.41) can be computed in closed form as
p(? | X , Y) = N ? | mN , SN ,		(9.43a) SN = (S-1 + s-2F?F)-1 ,	(9.43b) mN = SN (S-1m0 + s-2F?y) ,		 (9.43c)
where the subscript N indicates the size of the training set.
Proof	Bayes' theorem tells us that the posterior p(? | X , Y) is propor- tional to the product of the likelihood p(Y | X , ?) and the prior p(?):

Posterior	p(?	,	) = p(Y | X , ?)p(?)
p(Y | X)


(9.44a)

Likelihood	p(Y | X , ?) = N(y | F?, s2I)	(9.44b)
  Instead of looking at the product of the prior and the likelihood, we can transform the problem into log-space and solve for the mean and covariance of the posterior by completing the squares.
The sum of the log-prior and the log-likelihood is
log N(y | F?, s2I) + log N(? | m0, S0)	(9.45a)
= - 1 (s-2(y - F?)?(y - F?) + (? - m )?S-1(? - m )) + const


where the constant contains terms independent of ?. We will ignore the constant in the following. We now factorize (9.45b), which yields


- 2m?S-1? + m?S-1m0)

0	(9.46a)

= - 1 (??(s-2F?F + S-1)? - 2(s-2F?y + S-1m )??) + const ,

where the constant contains the black terms in (9.46a), which are inde- pendent of ?. The orange terms are terms that are linear in ?, and the blue terms are the ones that are quadratic in ?. Inspecting (9.46b), we find that this equation is quadratic in ?. The fact that the unnormalized log-posterior distribution is a (negative) quadratic form implies that the posterior is Gaussian, i.e.,
p(? | X , Y) = exp(log p(? | X , Y)) ? exp(log p(Y | X , ?) + log p(?))
(9.47a)
? exp  - 1 (??(s-2F?F + S-1)? - 2(s-2F?y + S-1m )??) ,

where we used (9.46b) in the last expression.
  The remaining task is it to bring this (unnormalized) Gaussian into the form that is proportional to  ? mN , SN , i.e., we need to identify the mean mN and the covariance matrix SN . To do this, we use the concept
of completing the squares. The desired log-posterior is	completing the squares
log N(? | mN , SN ) = -  (? - m  )?S-1(? - m  ) + const	(9.48a)
1
N
= - 1 (??S-1? - 2m? S-1? + m? S-1m  ) .	(9.48b)

Here, we factorized the quadratic form (? - mN )?S-1(? - mN ) into a	Since p(? | X , Y) =

term that is quadratic in ? alone (blue), a term that is linear in ? (orange), and a constant term (black). This allows us now to find SN and mN by matching the colored expressions in (9.46b) and (9.48b), which yields
  
mN , SN , it holds that
?MAP = mN .

S-1 = F?s-2IF + S-1	(9.49a)
N	0


and

?? SN = (s-2F?F + S-1)-1	(9.49b)

m? S-1 = (s-2F?y + S-1m0)?	(9.50a)

N  N	0
?? mN = SN (s-2F?y + S-1m0) .	(9.50b)


Remark (General Approach to Completing the Squares). If we are given an equation
                 x?Ax - 2a?x + const1 ,	(9.51)
where A is symmetric and positive definite, which we wish to bring into the form
                 (x - µ)?S(x - µ) + const2 ,	(9.52) we can do this by setting
S := A ,	(9.53)
µ := S-1a	(9.54)
and const2 = const1 - µ?Sµ.	?
  We can see that the terms inside the exponential in (9.47b) are of the form (9.51) with
A := s-2F?F + S-1 ,	(9.55)
a := s-2F?y + S-1m0 .	(9.56)
Since A, a can be difficult to identify in equations like (9.46a), it is of- ten helpful to bring these equations into the form (9.51) that decouples quadratic term, linear terms, and constants, which simplifies finding the desired solution.














E[y* | X , Y, x*] = ??(x*)mN = ??(x*)?MAP.
9.3.4 
Posterior Predictions
In (9.37), we computed the predictive distribution of y* at a test input x* using the parameter prior p(?). In principle, predicting with the pa- rameter posterior p(?  , ) is not fundamentally different given that in our conjugate model the prior and posterior are both Gaussian (with different parameters). Therefore, by following the same reasoning as in Section 9.3.2, we obtain the (posterior) predictive distribution
p(y* | X , Y, x*) = - p(y* | x*, ?)p(? | X , Y)d?	(9.57a)
= -  N(y* | ??(x*)?, s2)N(? | mN , SN )d?	(9.57b)
= N(y* | ??(x*)mN , ??(x*)SN ?(x*) + s2) .  (9.57c)
The term ??(x*)SN ?(x*) reflects the posterior uncertainty associated with the parameters ?. Note that SN depends on the training inputs through F; see (9.43b). The predictive mean ??(x*)mN coincides with the predictions made with the MAP estimate ?MAP.

Remark (Marginal Likelihood and Posterior Predictive Distribution). By replacing the integral in (9.57a), the predictive distribution can be equiv- alently written as the expectation E? | X,Y[p(y* x*, ?)], where the expec- tation is taken with respect to the parameter posterior p(?  , ).
  Writing the posterior predictive distribution in this way highlights a close resemblance to the marginal likelihood (9.42). The key difference between the marginal likelihood and the posterior predictive distribution are (i) the marginal likelihood can be thought of predicting the training targets y and not the test targets y*, and (ii) the marginal likelihood av- erages with respect to the parameter prior and not the parameter poste- rior.	?
Remark (Mean and Variance of Noise-Free Function Values). In many cases, we are not interested in the predictive distribution p(y* | X , Y, x*) of a (noisy) observation y*. Instead, we would like to obtain the distribu- tion of the (noise-free) function values f (x*) = ??(x*)?. We determine the corresponding moments by exploiting the properties of means and variances, which yields

E[f (x*) | X , Y] = E?[??(x*)? | X , Y] = ??(x*)E?[? | X , Y]
= ??(x*)mN = m?N ?(x*) ,
V?[f (x*) | X , Y] = V?[??(x*)? | X , Y]
= ??(x*)V?[? | X , Y]?(x*)
= ??(x*)SN ?(x*) .


(9.58)


(9.59)

We see that the predictive mean is the same as the predictive mean for noisy observations as the noise has mean 0, and the predictive variance only differs by s2, which is the variance of the measurement noise: When we predict noisy function values, we need to include s2 as a source of uncertainty, but this term is not needed for noise-free predictions. Here,
the only remaining uncertainty stems from the parameter posterior.	?	Integrating out

Remark (Distribution over Functions). The fact that we integrate out the parameters ? induces a distribution over functions: If we sample ?i ~ p(? | X , Y) from the parameter posterior, we obtain a single function re-

parameters induces a distribution over functions.

alization ?i??(·). The mean function, i.e., the set of all expected function  mean function
values E?[f (·) | ?, X , Y], of this distribution over functions is m?N ?(·). The (marginal) variance, i.e., the variance of the function f (·), is given by ??(·)SN ?(·).	?













Figure 9.10 Bayesian linear regression and posterior over functions.
(a) training data;
(b) posterior distribution over functions;
(c) Samples from the posterior over functions.







  Figure 9.11 shows some posterior distributions over functions induced by the parameter posterior. For different polynomial degrees M , the left panels show the maximum likelihood function ??ML?( ), the MAP func- tion ??MAP?( ) (which is identical to the posterior mean function), and the 67% and 95% predictive confidence bounds obtained by Bayesian linear regression, represented by the shaded areas.
  The right panels show samples from the posterior over functions: Here, we sampled parameters ?i from the parameter posterior and computed the function ??(x*)?i, which is a single realization of a function under the posterior distribution over functions. For low-order polynomials, the parameter posterior does not allow the parameters to vary much: The sampled functions are nearly identical. When we make the model more flexible by adding more parameters (i.e., we end up with a higher-order polynomial), these parameters are not sufficiently constrained by the pos- terior, and the sampled functions can be easily visually separated. We also see in the corresponding panels on the left how the uncertainty increases, especially at the boundaries.
  Although for a seventh-order polynomial the MAP estimate yields a rea- sonable fit, the Bayesian linear regression model additionally tells us that


4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4




4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4



Figure 9.11 Bayesian linear regression. Left panels: Shaded areas indicate the 67% (dark gray)
and 95% (light gray) predictive confidence bounds. The mean of the Bayesian linear regression model

(a) Posterior distribution for polynomials of degree M = 3 (left) and samples from the pos-
terior over functions (right).

coincides with the MAP estimate. The predictive uncertainty is the

4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

4

2

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

sum of the noise term and the posterior parameter uncertainty, which depends on the location of the test input. Right panels: sampled functions from the posterior distribution.

(b) Posterior distribution for polynomials of degree M = 5 (left) and samples from the posterior over functions (right).

4	4

2	2


0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

0

-2

-4
-4	-2	0	2	4

	
(c) Posterior distribution for polynomials of degree M = 7 (left) and samples from the pos- terior over functions (right).








the posterior uncertainty is huge. This information can be critical when we use these predictions in a decision-making system, where bad deci- sions can have significant consequences (e.g., in reinforcement learning or robotics).















The marginal likelihood can be
9.3.5 
Computing the Marginal Likelihood
In Section 8.6.2, we highlighted the importance of the marginal likelihood for Bayesian model selection. In the following, we compute the marginal likelihood for Bayesian linear regression with a conjugate Gaussian prior on the parameters, i.e., exactly the setting we have been discussing in this chapter.
Just to recap, we consider the following generative process:
? ~ N(m0, S0)	(9.60a)

n = 1, . . . , N . The marginal likelihood is given by
-




under the prior, i.e.,
E?[p(Y | X , ?)].

= -  N(y | X?, s2I)N(? | m0, S0)d? ,	(9.61b)


where we integrate out the model parameters ?. We compute the marginal likelihood in two steps: First, we show that the marginal likelihood is Gaussian (as a distribution in y); second, we compute the mean and co- variance of this Gaussian.
1. The marginal likelihood is Gaussian: From Section 6.5.2, we know that
(i) the product of two Gaussian random variables is an (unnormalized) Gaussian distribution, and (ii) a linear transformation of a Gaussian random variable is Gaussian distributed. In (9.61b), we require a linear transformation to bring  y X?, s2I into the form  ? µ, S for some µ, S. Once this is done, the integral can be solved in closed form. The result is the normalizing constant of the product of the two Gaus- sians. The normalizing constant itself has Gaussian shape; see (6.76).
2. Mean and covariance. We compute the mean and covariance matrix of the marginal likelihood by exploiting the standard results for means and covariances of affine transformations of random variables; see Sec- tion 6.4.4. The mean of the marginal likelihood is computed as
E[Y | X] = E?,?[X? + ?] = XE?[?] = Xm0 .	(9.62)
Note that ?	0, s2I is a vector of i.i.d. random variables. The covariance matrix is given as
Cov[Y|X ] = Cov?,?[X? + ?] = Cov?[X?] + s2I	(9.63a)
= X Cov?[?]X? + s2I = XS0X? + s2I .	(9.63b)
Hence, the marginal likelihood is
N	1
p(Y | X) = (2p)- 2  det(XS0X? + s2I)- 2	(9.64a)
· exp ( - 1 (y - Xm0)?(XS0X? + s2I)-1(y - Xm0))

9.4 Maximum Likelihood as Orthogonal Projection	313

4


2




0	
-2

-4
x
(a) Regression dataset consisting of noisy ob- servations yn (blue) of function values f (xn) at input locations xn.

4


2


0


-2

-4
x
(b) The orange dots are the projections of the noisy observations (blue dots) onto the line ?MLx. The maximum likelihood solution to a linear regression problem finds a subspace (line) onto which the overall projection er- ror (orange lines) of the observations is mini- mized.

Figure 9.12 Geometric interpretation of least squares.
(a) Dataset;
(b) maximum likelihood solution interpreted as a projection.



= N  y | Xm0, XS0X? + s2I  .	(9.64b)
Given the close connection with the posterior predictive distribution (see Remark on Marginal Likelihood and Posterior Predictive Distribution ear- lier in this section), the functional form of the marginal likelihood should not be too surprising.

9.4 Maximum Likelihood as Orthogonal Projection
Having crunched through much algebra to derive maximum likelihood and MAP estimates, we will now provide a geometric interpretation of maximum likelihood estimation. Let us consider a simple linear regression setting
                  y = x? + ?,	? ~ N 0, s2 ,	(9.65)
in which we consider linear functions f : R R that go through the origin (we omit features here for clarity). The parameter ? determines the slope of the line. Figure 9.12(a) shows a one-dimensional dataset.
  With a training data set (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) we recall the results from Section 9.2.1 and obtain the maximum likelihood estimator for the slope parameter as


?ML

= (X?X)-1X?y = X?y
X?X

? R ,	(9.66)

where X = [x1, . . . , xN ]?	RN , y = [y1, . . . , yN ]?	RN .
  This means for the training inputs X we obtain the optimal (maximum likelihood) reconstruction of the training targets as
X?y	XX?
X?ML = X X?X = X?X y ,	(9.67)





Linear regression can be thought of as a method for solving systems of linear equations.

i.e., we obtain the approximation with the minimum least-squares error between y and X?.
  As we are looking for a solution of y = X?, we can think of linear regression as a problem for solving systems of linear equations. There- fore, we can relate to concepts from linear algebra and analytic geometry that we discussed in Chapters 2 and 3. In particular, looking carefully at (9.67) we see that the maximum likelihood estimator ?ML in our ex-


Maximum likelihood linear regression performs an orthogonal projection.

ample from (9.65) effectively does an orthogonal projection of y onto
the one-dimensional subspace spanned by X. Recalling the results on or- thogonal projections from Section 3.8, we identify XX? as the projection matrix, ?ML as the coordinates of the projection onto the one-dimensional subspace of RN spanned by X and X?ML as the orthogonal projection of y onto this subspace.
  Therefore, the maximum likelihood solution provides also a geometri- cally optimal solution by finding the vectors in the subspace spanned by X that are "closest" to the corresponding observations y, where "clos- est" means the smallest (squared) distance of the function values yn to xn?. This is achieved by orthogonal projections. Figure 9.12(b) shows the projection of the noisy observations onto the subspace that minimizes the squared distance between the original dataset and its projection (note that the x-coordinate is fixed), which corresponds to the maximum likelihood solution.
In the general linear regression case where
               y = ??(x)? + ?,	? ~ N 0, s2	(9.68)
with vector-valued features ?(x) RK, we again can interpret the maxi- mum likelihood result

y ˜ F?ML ,	(9.69)
?ML = (F?F)-1F?y	(9.70)
as a projection onto a K-dimensional subspace of RN , which is spanned by the columns of the feature matrix F; see Section 3.8.2.
  If the feature functions ?k that we use to construct the feature ma- trix F are orthonormal (see Section 3.7), we obtain a special case where the columns of F form an orthonormal basis (see Section 3.5), such that F?F = I. This will then lead to the projection


F(F?F)-1F?y = FF?y =

(LK


? ??


y	(9.71)

k  k
k=1
so that the maximum likelihood projection is simply the sum of projections of y onto the individual basis vectors ?k, i.e., the columns of F. Further- more, the coupling between different features has disappeared due to the orthogonality of the basis. Many popular basis functions in signal process- ing, such as wavelets and Fourier bases, are orthogonal basis functions.

9.5 Further Reading	315
When the basis is not orthogonal, one can convert a set of linearly inde- pendent basis functions to an orthogonal basis by using the Gram-Schmidt process; see Section 3.8.3 and (Strang, 2003).

9.5 Further Reading
In this chapter, we discussed linear regression for Gaussian likelihoods and conjugate Gaussian priors on the parameters of the model. This al- lowed for closed-form Bayesian inference. However, in some applications we may want to choose a different likelihood function. For example, in
a binary classification setting, we observe only two possible (categorical)  classification
outcomes, and a Gaussian likelihood is inappropriate in this setting. In- stead, we can choose a Bernoulli likelihood that will return a probability of the predicted label to be 1 (or 0). We refer to the books by Barber (2012), Bishop (2006), and Murphy (2012) for an in-depth introduction to classifi- cation problems. A different example where non-Gaussian likelihoods are important is count data. Counts are non-negative integers, and in this case a Binomial or Poisson likelihood would be a better choice than a Gaussian.
All these examples fall into the category of generalized linear models, a flex-  generalized linear

ible generalization of linear regression that allows for response variables

model

that have error distributions other than a Gaussian distribution. The GLM	Generalized linear

generalizes linear regression by allowing the linear model to be related to the observed values via a smooth and invertible function s( ) that may be nonlinear so that y = s(f (x)), where f (x) = ???(x) is the linear regression model from (9.13). We can therefore think of a generalized linear model in terms of function composition y = s f , where f is a linear regression model and s the activation function. Note that although we are talking about "generalized linear models", the outputs y are no

models are the building blocks of deep neural networks.

longer linear in the parameters ?. In logistic regression, we choose the	logistic regression
logistic sigmoid s(f ) = 	1		[0, 1], which can be interpreted as the	logistic sigmoid
1+exp(-f )
probability of observing y = 1 of a Bernoulli random variable y ? {0, 1}.
The function s(·) is called transfer function or activation function, and its	transfer function

inverse is called the canonical link function. From this perspective, it is also clear that generalized linear models are the building blocks of (deep) feedforward neural networks: If we consider a generalized linear model y = s(Ax + b), where A is a weight matrix and b a bias vector, we iden- tify this generalized linear model as a single-layer neural network with activation function s( ). We can now recursively compose these functions via

activation function canonical link function
For ordinary linear regression the activation function would simply be the identity.
A great post on the

xk+1 = f k(xk)
f k(xk) = sk(Akxk + bk)

(9.72)

relation between GLMs and deep networks is

for k = 0, . . . , K	1, where x0 are the input features and xK = y are
the observed outputs, such that f K 1	f 0 is a K-layer deep neural network. Therefore, the building blocks of this deep neural network are

available at https://tinyurl. com/glm-dnn.









Gaussian process





kernel trick


















variable selection





LASSO

the generalized linear models defined in (9.72). Neural networks (Bishop, 1995; Goodfellow et al., 2016) are significantly more expressive and flexi- ble than linear regression models. However, maximum likelihood parame- ter estimation is a non-convex optimization problem, and marginalization of the parameters in a fully Bayesian setting is analytically intractable.
  We briefly hinted at the fact that a distribution over parameters in- duces a distribution over regression functions. Gaussian processes (Ras- mussen and Williams, 2006) are regression models where the concept of a distribution over function is central. Instead of placing a distribution over parameters, a Gaussian process places a distribution directly on the space of functions without the "detour" via the parameters. To do so, the Gaussian process exploits the kernel trick (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002), which allows us to compute inner products between two function values f (xi), f (xj) only by looking at the corresponding input xi, xj. A Gaus- sian process is closely related to both Bayesian linear regression and sup- port vector regression but can also be interpreted as a Bayesian neural network with a single hidden layer where the number of units tends to infinity (Neal, 1996; Williams, 1997). Excellent introductions to Gaussian processes can be found in MacKay (1998) and Rasmussen and Williams (2006).
  We focused on Gaussian parameter priors in the discussions in this chap- ter, because they allow for closed-form inference in linear regression mod- els. However, even in a regression setting with Gaussian likelihoods, we may choose a non-Gaussian prior. Consider a setting, where the inputs are x RD and our training set is small and of size N  D. This means that the regression problem is underdetermined. In this case, we can choose a parameter prior that enforces sparsity, i.e., a prior that tries to set as many parameters to 0 as possible (variable selection). This prior provides a stronger regularizer than the Gaussian prior, which often leads to an in- creased prediction accuracy and interpretability of the model. The Laplace prior is one example that is frequently used for this purpose. A linear re- gression model with the Laplace prior on the parameters is equivalent to linear regression with L1 regularization (LASSO) (Tibshirani, 1996). The Laplace distribution is sharply peaked at zero (its first derivative is discon- tinuous) and it concentrates its probability mass closer to zero than the Gaussian distribution, which encourages parameters to be 0. Therefore, the nonzero parameters are relevant for the regression problem, which is the reason why we also speak of "variable selection".




10


Dimensionality Reduction with Principal Component Analysis


Working directly with high-dimensional data, such as images, comes with	A 640 × 480 pixel

some difficulties: It is hard to analyze, interpretation is difficult, visualiza- tion is nearly impossible, and (from a practical point of view) storage of the data vectors can be expensive. However, high-dimensional data often has properties that we can exploit. For example, high-dimensional data is often overcomplete, i.e., many dimensions are redundant and can be ex- plained by a combination of other dimensions. Furthermore, dimensions in high-dimensional data are often correlated so that the data possesses an intrinsic lower-dimensional structure. Dimensionality reduction exploits structure and correlation and allows us to work with a more compact rep- resentation of the data, ideally without losing information. We can think of dimensionality reduction as a compression technique, similar to jpeg or mp3, which are compression algorithms for images and music.

color image is a data point in a
million-dimensional space, where every pixel responds to three dimensions, one for each color channel (red, green, blue).

In this chapter, we will discuss principal component analysis (PCA), an	principal component

algorithm for linear dimensionality reduction. PCA, proposed by Pearson (1901) and Hotelling (1933), has been around for more than 100 years and is still one of the most commonly used techniques for data compres- sion and data visualization. It is also used for the identification of simple patterns, latent factors, and structures of high-dimensional data. In the

analysis PCA
dimensionality
reduction


Figure 10.1
44Illustration: dimensionalityreduction. (a) The22original datasetdoes not vary much00along the x2direction. (b) The
-2

-4
5.0	2.5	0.0	2.5	5.0
x1

-2

-4
5.0	2.5	0.0	2.5	5.0
x1

data from (a) can be represented using the x1-coordinate alone with nearly no loss.

(a) Dataset with x1 and x2 coordinates.
(b) 
Compressed dataset where only the x1 coor- dinate is relevant.


317
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Karhunen-Lo`eve

signal processing community, PCA is also known as the Karhunen-Lo`eve

transform	transform. In this chapter, we derive PCA from first principles, drawing on our understanding of basis and basis change (Sections 2.6.1 and 2.7.2), projections (Section 3.8), eigenvalues (Section 4.2), Gaussian distribu- tions (Section 6.5), and constrained optimization (Section 7.2).
  Dimensionality reduction generally exploits a property of high-dimen- sional data (e.g., images) that it often lies on a low-dimensional subspace. Figure 10.1 gives an illustrative example in two dimensions. Although the data in Figure 10.1(a) does not quite lie on a line, the data does not vary much in the x2-direction, so that we can express it as if it were on a line - with nearly no loss; see Figure 10.1(b). To describe the data in Figure 10.1(b), only the x1-coordinate is required, and the data lies in a one-dimensional subspace of R2.










data covariance matrix
10.1 
Problem Setting
In PCA, we are interested in finding projections x˜n of data points xn that are as similar to the original data points as possible, but which have a sig- nificantly lower intrinsic dimensionality. Figure 10.1 gives an illustration of what this could look like.
More concretely, we consider an i.i.d. dataset  = x1, . . . , xN , xn
RD, with mean 0 that possesses the data covariance matrix (6.42)
N

1
S =	xn
n=1

xn? .	(10.1)

Furthermore, we assume there exists a low-dimensional compressed rep- resentation (code)








The columns
b1, . . . , bM of B form a basis of the M -dimensional subspace in which the projected data x˜ = BB?x	RD live.
                       
zn = B?xn ? RM	(10.2) of xn, where we define the projection matrix
B := [b1, . . . , bM ] ? RD×M .	(10.3)
We assume that the columns of B are orthonormal (Definition 3.7) so that bi?bj = 0 if and only if i = j and bi?bi = 1. We seek an M -dimensional subspace U  RD, dim(U ) = M < D onto which we project the data. We denote the projected data by x˜n U , and their coordinates (with respect to the basis vectors b1, . . . , bM of U ) by zn. Our aim is to find projections x˜n  RD (or equivalently the codes zn and the basis vectors b1, . . . , bM ) so that they are as similar to the original data xn and minimize the loss due to compression.




10.1 Problem Setting	319

Original

Reconstructed

Figure 10.2 Graphical illustration of PCA. In PCA, we find a compressed version z of original data x. The compressed data can be reconstructed into
x˜, which lives in the original data space, but has an intrinsic lower-dimensional representation than x.














  In Section 10.2, we will find low-dimensional representations that re- tain as much information as possible and minimize the compression loss. An alternative derivation of PCA is given in Section 10.3, where we will












The dimension of a vector space corresponds to the number of its basis vectors (see Section 2.6.1).

be looking at minimizing the squared reconstruction error  xn
tween the original data xn and its projection x˜n.

- x˜

n?  be-

  Figure 10.2 illustrates the setting we consider in PCA, where z repre- sents the lower-dimensional representation of the compressed data x˜ and plays the role of a bottleneck, which controls how much information can flow between x and x˜. In PCA, we consider a linear relationship between the original data x and its low-dimensional code z so that z = B?x and
x˜ = Bz for a suitable matrix B. Based on the motivation of thinking
of PCA as a data compression technique, we can interpret the arrows in Figure 10.2 as a pair of operations representing encoders and decoders. The linear mapping represented by B can be thought of as a decoder, which maps the low-dimensional code z RM back into the original data space RD. Similarly, B? can be thought of an encoder, which encodes the original data x as a low-dimensional (compressed) code z.
Throughout this chapter, we will use the MNIST digits dataset as a re-


Figure 10.3 Examples of handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset. http:
//yann.lecun.
com/exdb/mnist/.
occurring example, which contains 60,000 examples of handwritten digits
0 through 9. Each digit is a grayscale image of size 28 28, i.e., it contains 784 pixels so that we can interpret every image in this dataset as a vector x ? R784. Examples of these digits are shown in Figure 10.3.

10.2 Maximum Variance Perspective
Figure 10.1 gave an example of how a two-dimensional dataset can be represented using a single coordinate. In Figure 10.1(b), we chose to ig- nore the x2-coordinate of the data because it did not add too much in- formation so that the compressed data is similar to the original data in Figure 10.1(a). We could have chosen to ignore the x1-coordinate, but then the compressed data had been very dissimilar from the original data, and much information in the data would have been lost.
  If we interpret information content in the data as how "space filling" the dataset is, then we can describe the information contained in the data by looking at the spread of the data. From Section 6.4.1, we know that the variance is an indicator of the spread of the data, and we can derive PCA as a dimensionality reduction algorithm that maximizes the variance in the low-dimensional representation of the data to retain as much information as possible. Figure 10.4 illustrates this.
  Considering the setting discussed in Section 10.1, our aim is to find a matrix B (see (10.3)) that retains as much information as possible when compressing data by projecting it onto the subspace spanned by the columns b1, . . . , bM of B. Retaining most information after data com- pression is equivalent to capturing the largest amount of variance in the low-dimensional code (Hotelling, 1933).
Remark. (Centered Data) For the data covariance matrix in (10.1), we assumed centered data. We can make this assumption without loss of gen- erality: Let us assume that µ is the mean of the data. Using the properties of the variance, which we discussed in Section 6.4.4, we obtain
   Vz[z] = Vx[B?(x - µ)] = Vx[B?x - B?µ] = Vx[B?x] ,   (10.6)
i.e., the variance of the low-dimensional code does not depend on the mean of the data. Therefore, we assume without loss of generality that the data has mean 0 for the remainder of this section. With this assumption the mean of the low-dimensional code is also 0 since Ez[z] = Ex[B?x] = B?Ex[x] = 0.	?







10.2.1 Direction with Maximal Variance
We maximize the variance of the low-dimensional code using a sequential

Figure 10.4 PCA finds a
lower-dimensional subspace (line) that maintains as much variance (spread of the data) as possible when the data (blue) is projected onto this subspace (orange).

approach. We start by seeking a single vector b1 ? RD that maximizes the	The vector b1 will

variance of the projected data, i.e., we aim to maximize the variance of the first coordinate z1 of z ? RM so that
N

be the first column of the matrix B and therefore the first of M orthonormal

1
V := V[z ] =

L z2



(10.7)

basis vectors that


is maximized, where we exploited the i.i.d. assumption of the data and defined z1n as the first coordinate of the low-dimensional representation zn ? RM of xn ? RD. Note that first component of zn is given by
z1n = b1?xn ,	(10.8)
i.e., it is the coordinate of the orthogonal projection of xn onto the one- dimensional subspace spanned by b1 (Section 3.8). We substitute (10.8) into (10.7), which yields

subspace.



V =  1 L(b?x

)2 =  1

L b?x


x?b


(10.9a)

1	1 n
n=1
1 L


 

1
n=1

n  n  1


where S is the data covariance matrix defined in (10.1). In (10.9a), we have used the fact that the dot product of two vectors is symmetric with respect to its arguments, that is, b1?xn = xn?b1.
Notice that arbitrarily increasing the magnitude of the vector b1 in-
creases V1, that is, a vector b1 that is two times longer can result in V1
that is potentially four times larger. Therefore, we restrict all solutions to	?b1?2 = 1

 b1	= 1, which results in a constrained optimization problem in which we seek the direction along which the data varies most.
With the restriction of the solution space to unit vectors the vector b1
that points in the direction of maximum variance can be found by the

?? ?b1? = 1.

constrained optimization problem
max b1?Sb1
b1
subject to ?b ?2 = 1 .
Following Section 7.2, we obtain the Lagrangian




(10.10)

L(b1, ?) = b1?Sb1 + ?1(1 - b1?b1)	(10.11)
to solve this constrained optimization problem. The partial derivatives of
L with respect to b1 and ?1 are

?L = 2b?S - 2? b? ,	?L = 1 - b?b


,	(10.12)

?b1	1	??1	1









The quantity v?1 is also called the loading of the unit vector b1 and represents the standard deviation of the data accounted for by the principal subspace span[b1].
principal component

respectively. Setting these partial derivatives to 0 gives us the relations
Sb1 = ?1b1 ,	(10.13)
b1?b1 = 1 .	(10.14)
By comparing this with the definition of an eigenvalue decomposition (Section 4.4), we see that b1 is an eigenvector of the data covariance matrix S, and the Lagrange multiplier ?1 plays the role of the correspond- ing eigenvalue. This eigenvector property (10.13) allows us to rewrite our variance objective (10.10) as
V1 = b1?Sb1 = ?1b1?b1 = ?1 ,	(10.15)
i.e., the variance of the data projected onto a one-dimensional subspace equals the eigenvalue that is associated with the basis vector b1 that spans this subspace. Therefore, to maximize the variance of the low-dimensional code, we choose the basis vector associated with the largest eigenvalue of the data covariance matrix. This eigenvector is called the first principal component. We can determine the effect/contribution of the principal com- ponent b1 in the original data space by mapping the coordinate z1n back into data space, which gives us the projected data point
x˜n = b1z1n = b1b?xn ? RD	(10.16)

in the original data space.
Remark. Although x˜n is a D-dimensional vector, it only requires a single coordinate z1n to represent it with respect to the basis vector b1 ? RD.  ?

10.2.2 M -dimensional Subspace with Maximal Variance
Assume we have found the first m 1 principal components as the m 1 eigenvectors of S that are associated with the largest m 1 eigenvalues. Since S is symmetric, the spectral theorem (Theorem 4.15) states that we can use these eigenvectors to construct an orthonormal eigenbasis of an

(m - 1)-dimensional subspace of RD. Generally, the mth principal com- ponent can be found by subtracting the effect of the first m - 1 principal components b1, . . . , bm-1 from the data, thereby trying to find principal components that compress the remaining information. We then arrive at the new data matrix
m-1
Xˆ := X	bibi?X = X	Bm-1X ,	(10.17)
i=1
where X = [x1, . . . , xN ] ? RD×N contains the data points as column	The matrix Xˆ :=
		

the subspace spanned by b1, . . . , bm-1.
Remark (Notation). Throughout this chapter, we do not follow the con- vention of collecting data x1, . . . , xN as the rows of the data matrix, but we define them to be the columns of X. This means that our data ma- trix X is a D N matrix instead of the conventional N D matrix. The reason for our choice is that the algebra operations work out smoothly without the need to either transpose the matrix or to redefine vectors as row vectors that are left-multiplied onto matrices.	?
To find the mth principal component, we maximize the variance

contains the information in the data that has not yet been compressed.


V	= V[z

] =  1 L z2


=  1 L(b? xˆ )2 = b? Sˆb



,	(10.18)

subject to ?bm?  = 1, where we followed the same steps as in (10.9b)
and defined Sˆ as the data covariance matrix of the transformed dataset
 ˆ := xˆ1, . . . , xˆN . As previously, when we looked at the first principal component alone, we solve a constrained optimization problem and dis- cover that the optimal solution bm is the eigenvector of Sˆ that is associated with the largest eigenvalue of Sˆ.
It turns out that bm is also an eigenvector of S. More generally, the sets
of eigenvectors of S and Sˆ are identical. Since both S and Sˆ are sym-
metric, we can find an ONB of eigenvectors (spectral theorem 4.15), i.e., there exist D distinct eigenvectors for both S and Sˆ. Next, we show that every eigenvector of S is an eigenvector of Sˆ. Assume we have already found eigenvectors b1, . . . , bm-1 of Sˆ. Consider an eigenvector bi of S, i.e., Sbi = ?ibi. In general,

Sˆbi

=  1 Xˆ Xˆ ?b
N	i

1
= N (X - B


m-1

X)(X - B


m-1


X)?bi


(10.19a)

= (S - SBm-1 - Bm-1S + Bm-1SBm-1)bi .	(10.19b)
  We distinguish between two cases. If i ? m, i.e., bi is an eigenvector that is not among the first m - 1 principal components, then bi is orthogo- nal to the first m-1 principal components and Bm-1bi = 0. If i < m, i.e., bi is among the first m - 1 principal components, then bi is a basis vector

of the principal subspace onto which Bm-1 projects. Since b1, . . . , bm-1 are an ONB of this principal subspace, we obtain Bm-1bi = bi. The two cases can be summarized as follows:
     Bm-1bi = bi	if i < m,	Bm-1bi = 0	if i ? m.	(10.20) In the case i ? m, by using (10.20) in (10.19b), we obtain Sˆbi = (S -
Bm-1S)bi = Sbi = ?ibi , i.e., bi is also an eigenvector of Sˆ with eigen-
value ?i. Specifically,
                    Sˆbm = Sbm = ?mbm .	(10.21) Equation (10.21) reveals that bm is not only an eigenvector of S but also
of Sˆ. Specifically, ?m is the largest eigenvalue of Sˆ and ?m is the mth











This derivation shows that there is an intimate connection between

largest eigenvalue of S, and both have the associated eigenvector bm.
In the case i < m, by using (10.20) in (10.19b), we obtain
Sˆbi = (S - SBm-1 - Bm-1S + Bm-1SBm-1)bi = 0 = 0bi  (10.22)
This means that b1, . . . , bm-1 are also eigenvectors of Sˆ, but they are as- sociated with eigenvalue 0 so that b1, . . . , bm-1 span the null space of Sˆ. Overall, every eigenvector of S is also an eigenvector of Sˆ. However,
if the eigenvectors of S are part of the (m	1) dimensional principal subspace, then the associated eigenvalue of Sˆ is 0.
  With the relation (10.21) and b?mbm = 1, the variance of the data pro- jected onto the mth principal component is

the M -dimensional subspace with

Vm = b?mSbm

=	?mbmbm = ?m .	(10.23)

maximal variance and the eigenvalue decomposition. We will revisit this connection in Section 10.4.

This means that the variance of the data, when projected onto an M - dimensional subspace, equals the sum of the eigenvalues that are associ- ated with the corresponding eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix.



Figure 10.5 Properties of the training data of MNIST "8". (a)
Eigenvalues sorted in descending order;
(b) Variance captured by the principal components associated with the largest eigenvalues.


Figure 10.6 Illustration of the projection approach: Find a subspace (line) that minimizes the length of the difference vector between projected (orange) and original (blue) data.



  Overall, to find an M -dimensional subspace of RD that retains as much information as possible, PCA tells us to choose the columns of the matrix B in (10.3) as the M eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix S that are associated with the M largest eigenvalues. The maximum amount of variance PCA can capture with the first M principal components is

M
VM =	?m ,	(10.24)
m=1
where the ?m are the M largest eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix
S. Consequently, the variance lost by data compression via PCA is


JM :=

j=LM +1

?j = VD - VM .	(10.25)

Instead of these absolute quantities, we can define the relative variance captured as VM , and the relative variance lost by compression as 1 - VM .

10.3 Projection Perspective
In the following, we will derive PCA as an algorithm that directly mini- mizes the average reconstruction error. This perspective allows us to in- terpret PCA as implementing an optimal linear auto-encoder. We will draw heavily from Chapters 2 and 3.
  In the previous section, we derived PCA by maximizing the variance in the projected space to retain as much information as possible. In the

Figure 10.7 Simplified projection setting.
(a) A vector x	R2
(red cross) shall be projected onto a one-dimensional subspace U ? R2 spanned by b. (b) shows the difference vectors between x and some candidates x˜.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
x1
(a) Setting.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
x1
(b) Differences x	x˜i for 50 different x˜i are shown by the red lines.



following, we will look at the difference vectors between the original data xn and their reconstruction x˜n and minimize this distance so that xn and x˜n are as close as possible. Figure 10.6 illustrates this setting.










Vectors x˜	U could be vectors on a
10.3.1 
Setting and Objective
Assume an (ordered) orthonormal basis (ONB) B = (b1, . . . , bD) of RD, i.e., bi?bj = 1 if and only if i = j and 0 otherwise.
From Section 2.5 we know that for a basis (b1, . . . , bD) of RD any x
RD can be written as a linear combination of the basis vectors of RD, i.e.,

plane in R3. The dimensionality of the plane is 2, but

D
x =	?dbd
d=1

M
=	?mbm
m=1

+
j=M +1

?jbj

(10.26)

the vectors still have three coordinates with respect to the

for suitable coordinates ?d	R.
We are interested in finding vectors x˜

? RD, which live in lower-

standard basis of
R3.

dimensional subspace U ? RD, dim(U ) = M , so that
M
x˜ =	zmbm	U	RD	(10.27)
m=1
is as similar to x as possible. Note that at this point we need to assume that the coordinates zm of x˜ and ?m of x are not identical.
  In the following, we use exactly this kind of representation of x˜ to find optimal coordinates z and basis vectors b1, . . . , bM such that x˜ is as sim- ilar to the original data point x as possible, i.e., we aim to minimize the (Euclidean) distance ?x - x˜?. Figure 10.7 illustrates this setting.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the dataset X = {x1, . . . , xN },
xn ? RD, is centered at 0, i.e., E[X] = 0. Without the zero-mean assump-

tion, we would arrive at exactly the same solution, but the notation would be substantially more cluttered.
  We are interested in finding the best linear projection of	onto a lower- dimensional subspace U of RD with dim(U ) = M and orthonormal basis
vectors b1, . . . , bM . We will call this subspace U the principal subspace.	principal subspace
The projections of the data points are denoted by

M
x˜n :=	zmnbm = Bzn	RD ,	(10.28)
m=1

where zn := [z1n, . . . , zMn]?  RM is the coordinate vector of x˜n with respect to the basis (b1, . . . , bM ). More specifically, we are interested in having the x˜n as similar to xn as possible.
  The similarity measure we use in the following is the squared distance (Euclidean norm) x  x˜ 2 between x and x˜. We therefore define our ob-
jective as minimizing the average squared Euclidean distance (reconstruction reconstruction error
error) (Pearson, 1901)

1
JM :=
N


N
xn
n=1

- x˜

n?2 ,	(10.29)

where we make it explicit that the dimension of the subspace onto which we project the data is M . In order to find this optimal linear projection, we need to find the orthonormal basis of the principal subspace and the coordinates zn  RM of the projections with respect to this basis.
  To find the coordinates zn and the ONB of the principal subspace, we follow a two-step approach. First, we optimize the coordinates zn for a given ONB (b1, . . . , bM ); second, we find the optimal ONB.

10.3.2 Finding Optimal Coordinates
Let us start by finding the optimal coordinates z1n, . . . , zMn of the projec- tions x˜n for n = 1, . . . , N . Consider Figure 10.7(b), where the principal subspace is spanned by a single vector b. Geometrically speaking, finding the optimal coordinates z corresponds to finding the representation of the linear projection x˜ with respect to b that minimizes the distance between x˜ x. From Figure 10.7(b), it is clear that this will be the orthogonal projection, and in the following we will show exactly this.
  We assume an ONB (b1, . . . , bM ) of U  RD. To find the optimal co- ordinates zm with respect to this basis, we require the partial derivatives


?JM
?zin

= ?JM ?x˜n ,	(10.30a)
?x˜n ?zin

?JM

2
= -	(x

- x˜

)? ? R1×D ,	(10.30b)

?x˜n

N	n	n

Figure 10.8 Optimal projection of a vector x	R2 onto a
one-dimensional subspace (continuation from Figure 10.7).
(a) Distances
?x - x˜? for some
x˜	U .
(b) Orthogonal projection and optimal coordinates.

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25
1.0	0.5	0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0
x1
(a) Distances ?x - x˜? for some x˜ = z1b ?
U = span[b]; see panel (b) for the setting.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
x1
(b) The vector x˜ that minimizes the distance in panel (a) is its orthogonal projection onto
U . The coordinate of the projection x˜ with respect to the basis vector b that spans U is the factor we need to scale b in order to "reach" x˜.




?x˜n


?z


(10.28)	?
=
?z

(LM



zmnbm



= bi



(10.30c)

in	in

m=1

for i = 1, . . . , M , such that we obtain


?JM


(10.30b)
(10.30c)	2

˜	?	(10.28)	2 (	L	 

?zin

=	- N (xn - xn) bi

=	- N

xn -

m=1

zmnbm

bi
(10.31a)

ONB	2	?

?	2	?

The coordinates of the optimal projection of xn with respect to the basis vectors
b1, . . . , bM are the coordinates of the orthogonal projection of xn onto the principal subspace.

= - N (xn bi - zinbi bi) = - N (xn bi - zin) .	(10.31b)
since bi?bi = 1. Setting this partial derivative to 0 yields immediately the optimal coordinates
                   zin = xn?bi = bi?xn	(10.32)
for i = 1, . . . , M and n = 1, . . . , N . This means that the optimal co- ordinates zin of the projection x˜n are the coordinates of the orthogonal projection (see Section 3.8) of the original data point xn onto the one- dimensional subspace that is spanned by bi. Consequently:
The optimal linear projection x˜n of xn is an orthogonal projection. The coordinates of x˜n with respect to the basis (b1, . . . , bM ) are the coordinates of the orthogonal projection of xn onto the principal sub- space.
An orthogonal projection is the best linear mapping given the objec- tive (10.29).
The coordinates ?m of x in (10.26) and the coordinates zm of x˜ in (10.27)

must be identical for m = 1, . . . , M since U ? = span[bM+1, . . . , bD] is the orthogonal complement (see Section 3.6) of U = span[b1, . . . , bM ].
Remark (Orthogonal Projections with Orthonormal Basis Vectors). Let us briefly recap orthogonal projections from Section 3.8. If (b1, . . . , bD) is an
orthonormal basis of RD then	b?x is the
coordinate of the

x˜ = bj(b?bj)-1b?x = bjb?x ? RD	(10.33)
is the orthogonal projection of x onto the subspace spanned by the jth ba- sis vector, and zj = bj?x is the coordinate of this projection with respect to the basis vector bj that spans that subspace since zjbj = x˜. Figure 10.8(b) illustrates this setting.
  More generally, if we aim to project onto an M -dimensional subspace of RD, we obtain the orthogonal projection of x onto the M -dimensional subspace with orthonormal basis vectors b1, . . . , bM as
x˜ = B(B?B)-1B?x = BB?x ,	(10.34)
 
=I

where we defined B := [b1, . . . , bM ]  RD×M . The coordinates of this projection with respect to the ordered basis (b1, . . . , bM ) are z := B?x as discussed in Section 3.8.
  We can think of the coordinates as a representation of the projected vector in a new coordinate system defined by (b1, . . . , bM ). Note that al-

orthogonal projection of x onto the subspace spanned by bj .

though x˜ ? RD, we only need M coordinates z1, . . . , zM to represent
this vector; the other D - M coordinates with respect to the basis vectors
(bM+1, . . . , bD) are always 0.	?
  So far we have shown that for a given ONB we can find the optimal coordinates of x˜ by an orthogonal projection onto the principal subspace. In the following, we will determine what the best basis is.


10.3.3 Finding the Basis of the Principal Subspace
To determine the basis vectors b1, . . . , bM of the principal subspace, we rephrase the loss function (10.29) using the results we have so far. This will make it easier to find the basis vectors. To reformulate the loss func- tion, we exploit our results from before and obtain


x˜  = L z


b	(10.32) L(x?b  )b



.	(10.35)

We now exploit the symmetry of the dot product, which yields


x˜n =


M


m=1


bmb?m


xn .	(10.36)



Figure 10.9 Orthogonal projection and displacement vectors. When projecting data points xn (blue) onto subspace U1, we obtain x˜n (orange). The displacement vector x˜n	xn lies completely in the orthogonal complement U2 of U1.


6

4

2

0

-2
-4
-6
-5	x 0	5

Since we can generally write the original data point xn as a linear combi- nation of all basis vectors, it holds that

xn =

Ld=1

zdnbd


D
(10.32)
=
d=1


(xn?bd)bd =


D


d=1


bdbd?


xn	(10.37a)

M
=
m=1


bmb?m


xn +

(j=LM +1


bjbj?


xn ,	(10.37b)

where we split the sum with D terms into a sum over M and a sum over D M terms. With this result, we find that the displacement vector xn x˜n, i.e., the difference vector between the original data point and its projection, is

xn - x˜n =

(j=LM +1
D


bjbj?


xn	(10.38a)

=
j=M +1

(xn?bj)bj .	(10.38b)

This means the difference is exactly the projection of the data point onto the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace: We identify the ma-
trix  D	b b? in (10.38a) as the projection matrix that performs this
projection. Hence the displacement vector xn	x˜n lies in the subspace that is orthogonal to the principal subspace as illustrated in Figure 10.9.
Remark (Low-Rank Approximation). In (10.38a), we saw that the projec- tion matrix, which projects x onto x˜, is given by
M
bmb?m = BB? .	(10.39)
m=1

By construction as a sum of rank-one matrices bmb?m we see that BB? is

symmetric and has rank M . Therefore, the average squared reconstruction error can also be written as

1


n=1

?xn

- x˜

n? =

1


n=1

1xn

- BB?xn1


(10.40a)

1 L

Finding orthonormal basis vectors b1, . . . , bM , which minimize the differ-	PCA finds the best

ence between the original data xn and their projections x˜n, is equivalent to finding the best rank-M approximation BB? of the identity matrix I (see Section 4.6).	?
Now we have all the tools to reformulate the loss function (10.29).

rank-M approximation of the identity matrix.


1
JM =


?xn


- x˜


(10.38b)  1
n?	=	1

(bj?xn

)bj1

.	(10.41)

n=1

N n=1 1j=M +1	1

We now explicitly compute the squared norm and exploit the fact that the
bj form an ONB, which yields

J	=  1 L

L (b?x

)2 =  1 L

L b?x

b?x

(10.42a)

=  1
N

L bj?xn

xn?bj

,	(10.42b)

n=1 j=M +1
where we exploited the symmetry of the dot product in the last step to write bj?xn = xn?bj. We now swap the sums and obtain

JM =

j=LM +1

bj?

1
n=1

xnxn?

bj =

j=LM +1

bj?Sbj	(10.43a)

L	..



=..:,,S	..
L


    LD
 



projection matrix
(10.43b)
where we exploited the property that the trace operator tr( ) (see (4.18)) is linear and invariant to cyclic permutations of its arguments. Since we assumed that our dataset is centered, i.e., E[ ] = 0, we identify S as the data covariance matrix. Since the projection matrix in (10.43b) is con- structed as a sum of rank-one matrices bjbj? it itself is of rank D  M .
Equation (10.43a) implies that we can formulate the average squared
reconstruction error equivalently as the covariance matrix of the data,



Minimizing the average squared reconstruction error is equivalent to minimizing the projection of the data covariance matrix onto the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace.
Minimizing the average squared reconstruction error is equivalent to maximizing the

projected onto the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace. Min- imizing the average squared reconstruction error is therefore equivalent to minimizing the variance of the data when projected onto the subspace we ignore, i.e., the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace. Equiva- lently, we maximize the variance of the projection that we retain in the principal subspace, which links the projection loss immediately to the maximum-variance formulation of PCA discussed in Section 10.2. But this then also means that we will obtain the same solution that we obtained for the maximum-variance perspective. Therefore, we omit a derivation that is identical to the one presented in Section 10.2 and summarize the results from earlier in the light of the projection perspective.
  The average squared reconstruction error, when projecting onto the M - dimensional principal subspace, is
D

variance of the projected data.

JM =

j=LM +1

?j ,	(10.44)

where ?j are the eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix. Therefore,
to minimize (10.44) we need to select the smallest D M eigenvalues, which then implies that their corresponding eigenvectors are the basis of the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace. Consequently, this means that the basis of the principal subspace comprises the eigenvectors b1, . . . , bM that are associated with the largest M eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix.




Figure 10.10 Embedding of MNIST digits 0
(blue) and 1 (orange) in a two-dimensional
principal subspace using PCA. Four embeddings of the digits "0" and "1" in the principal subspace are highlighted in red with their corresponding original digit.

10.4 Eigenvector Computation and Low-Rank Approximations	333


10.4 Eigenvector Computation and Low-Rank Approximations
In the previous sections, we obtained the basis of the principal subspace as the eigenvectors that are associated with the largest eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix
S =  1 L x x? =  1 XX? ,	(10.45)

X = [x1, . . . , xN ] ? RD×N .	(10.46)
Note that X is a D	N matrix, i.e., it is the transpose of the "typical" data matrix (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012). To get the eigenvalues (and
the corresponding eigenvectors) of S, we can follow two approaches:	Use
eigendecomposition

We perform an eigendecomposition (see Section 4.2) and compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of S directly.
We use a singular value decomposition (see Section 4.5). Since S is symmetric and factorizes into XX? (ignoring the factor  1 ), the eigen-

or SVD to compute eigenvectors.

values of S are the squared singular values of X. More specifically, the SVD of X is given by
X  =  U	S V ? ,	(10.47)
D....×,,N..	D....×,,D.. D....×,,N.. N 	×,,N..
where U	RD×D and V ?	RN×N are orthogonal matrices and S
RD×N is a matrix whose only nonzero entries are the singular values sii ?
0. It then follows that
S = 1 XX? = 1 U S V ?V S?U ? = 1 U SS?U ? .	(10.48)
..=..I,,N ..
With the results from Section 4.5, we get that the columns of U are the	The columns of U

eigenvectors of XX? (and therefore S). Furthermore, the eigenvalues
?d of S are related to the singular values of X via
s2
?d =	d .	(10.49)
N
This relationship between the eigenvalues of S and the singular values of X provides the connection between the maximum variance view (Sec- tion 10.2) and the singular value decomposition.

are the eigenvectors of S.










Eckart-Young
10.4.1 
PCA Using Low-Rank Matrix Approximations
To maximize the variance of the projected data (or minimize the average squared reconstruction error), PCA chooses the columns of U in (10.48) to be the eigenvectors that are associated with the M largest eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix S so that we identify U as the projection ma- trix B in (10.3), which projects the original data onto a lower-dimensional subspace of dimension M . The Eckart-Young theorem (Theorem 4.25 in

theorem	Section 4.6) offers a direct way to estimate the low-dimensional represen- tation. Consider the best rank-M approximation
         X˜ M := argminrk(A)?M ?X - A? ? RD×N	(10.50)
of X, where ?·?2 is the spectral norm defined in (4.93). The Eckart-Young theorem states that X˜ M is given by truncating the SVD at the top-M singular value. In other words, we obtain


X˜ M = U M SM

V ?M

 

? RD×N	(10.51)

D×M M ×M M ×N
with orthogonal matrices U M := [u1, . . . , uM ]  RD×M and V M := [v1, . . . , vM ]  RN×M and a diagonal matrix SM  RM×M whose diago- nal entries are the M largest singular values of X.











Abel-Ruffini
10.4.2 
Practical Aspects
Finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors is also important in other funda- mental machine learning methods that require matrix decompositions. In theory, as we discussed in Section 4.2, we can solve for the eigenvalues as roots of the characteristic polynomial. However, for matrices larger than
4 4 this is not possible because we would need to find the roots of a poly- nomial of degree 5 or higher. However, the Abel-Ruffini theorem (Ruffini,

theorem	1799; Abel, 1826) states that there exists no algebraic solution to this
problem for polynomials of degree 5 or more. Therefore, in practice, we

np.linalg.eigh
or
np.linalg.svd









power iteration

solve for eigenvalues or singular values using iterative methods, which are implemented in all modern packages for linear algebra.
  In many applications (such as PCA presented in this chapter), we only require a few eigenvectors. It would be wasteful to compute the full de- composition, and then discard all eigenvectors with eigenvalues that are beyond the first few. It turns out that if we are interested in only the first few eigenvectors (with the largest eigenvalues), then iterative processes, which directly optimize these eigenvectors, are computationally more effi- cient than a full eigendecomposition (or SVD). In the extreme case of only needing the first eigenvector, a simple method called the power iteration is very efficient. Power iteration chooses a random vector x0 that is not in

10.5 PCA in High Dimensions	335
the null space of S and follows the iteration

xk+1

 Sxk 
=	,	k = 0, 1, . . . .	(10.52)
?Sxk?

This means the vector xk is multiplied by S in every iteration and then	If S is invertible, it

normalized, i.e., we always have xk = 1. This sequence of vectors con- verges to the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of S. The original Google PageRank algorithm (Page et al., 1999) uses such an al- gorithm for ranking web pages based on their hyperlinks.

10.5 PCA in High Dimensions
In order to do PCA, we need to compute the data covariance matrix. In D dimensions, the data covariance matrix is a D D matrix. Computing the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of this matrix is computationally expensive as it scales cubically in D. Therefore, PCA, as we discussed earlier, will be infeasible in very high dimensions. For example, if our xn are images with 10,000 pixels (e.g., 100 100 pixel images), we would need to compute the eigendecomposition of a 10,000 10,000 covariance matrix. In the following, we provide a solution to this problem for the case that we have substantially fewer data points than dimensions, i.e., N  D.
  Assume we have a centered dataset x1, . . . , xN , xn  RD. Then the data covariance matrix is given as
S =  1 XX?	RD×D ,	(10.53)
N
where X = [x1, . . . , xN ] is a D  N matrix whose columns are the data points.
  We now assume that N  D, i.e., the number of data points is smaller than the dimensionality of the data. If there are no duplicate data points, the rank of the covariance matrix S is N , so it has D N + 1 many eigen- values that are 0. Intuitively, this means that there are some redundancies. In the following, we will exploit this and turn the D D covariance matrix into an N  N covariance matrix whose eigenvalues are all positive.
In PCA, we ended up with the eigenvector equation
Sbm = ?mbm ,	m = 1, . . . , M ,	(10.54)
where bm is a basis vector of the principal subspace. Let us rewrite this equation a bit: With S defined in (10.53), we obtain

is sufficient to ensure that x0 ?= 0.


Sbm

= 1 XX?b
N	m


= ?mbm

.	(10.55)

We now multiply X? ? RN×D from the left-hand side, which yields
1 X?X X?b	= ?  X?b	??  1 X?Xc	= ? c  ,	(10.56)
N .. ..,, .. .. ..,, m..	m	m	N	m	m  m

and we get a new eigenvector/eigenvalue equation: ?m remains eigen- value, which confirms our results from Section 4.5.3 that the nonzero eigenvalues of XX? equal the nonzero eigenvalues of X?X. We obtain the eigenvector of the matrix  1 X?X ? RN×N associated with ?m as cm := X?bm. Assuming we have no duplicate data points, this matrix
has rank N and is invertible. This also implies that  1 X?X has the same (nonzero) eigenvalues as the data covariance matrix S. But this is now an N	N matrix, so that we can compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors much more efficiently than for the original D	D data covariance matrix. Now that we have the eigenvectors of  1 X?X, we are going to re- cover the original eigenvectors, which we still need for PCA. Currently, we know the eigenvectors of  1 X?X. If we left-multiply our eigenvalue/
eigenvector equation with X, we get

1 XX? Xc
		m
..	..S,,	..


= ?m


Xcm


(10.57)

and we recover the data covariance matrix again. This now also means that we recover Xcm as an eigenvector of S.
Remark. If we want to apply the PCA algorithm that we discussed in Sec- tion 10.6, we need to normalize the eigenvectors Xcm of S so that they have norm 1.	?




















standardization
10.6 
Key Steps of PCA in Practice
In the following, we will go through the individual steps of PCA using a running example, which is summarized in Figure 10.11. We are given a two-dimensional dataset (Figure 10.11(a)), and we want to use PCA to project it onto a one-dimensional subspace.
1. Mean subtraction We start by centering the data by computing the mean µ of the dataset and subtracting it from every single data point. This ensures that the dataset has mean 0 (Figure 10.11(b)). Mean sub- traction is not strictly necessary but reduces the risk of numerical prob- lems.
2. Standardization  Divide the data points by the standard deviation sd of the dataset for every dimension d = 1, . . . , D. Now the data is unit free, and it has variance 1 along each axis, which is indicated by the two arrows in Figure 10.11(c). This step completes the standardization of the data.
3. Eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix Compute the data covariance matrix and its eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors. Since the covariance matrix is symmetric, the spectral theorem (The- orem 4.15) states that we can find an ONB of eigenvectors. In Fig- ure 10.11(d), the eigenvectors are scaled by the magnitude of the cor-

10.6 Key Steps of PCA in Practice	337

Figure 10.11 Steps

5.0

2.5

0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1
(a) Original dataset.





5.0

2.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1
(b) Step 1: Centering by sub- tracting the mean from each data point.



5.0

2.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1
(c) Step 2: Dividing by the standard deviation to make the data unit free. Data has variance 1 along each axis.


5.0

2.5

of PCA. (a) Original dataset;
(b) centering;
(c) divide by standard deviation;
(d) eigendecomposi- tion; (e) projection;
(f) mapping back to original data space.



0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1

0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1

0.0

-2.5
0	5
x1

(d) Step 3: Compute eigenval- ues and eigenvectors (arrows) of the data covariance matrix (ellipse).
(e) 
Step 4: Project data onto the principal subspace.
(f) 
Undo the standardization and move projected data back into the original data space from (a).



responding eigenvalue. The longer vector spans the principal subspace, which we denote by U . The data covariance matrix is represented by the ellipse.
4. Projection We can project any data point x* ? RD onto the principal subspace: To get this right, we need to standardize x* using the mean µd and standard deviation sd of the training data in the dth dimension, respectively, so that


x(d)
*

x(d) - µ sd


d ,	d = 1, . . . , D ,	(10.58)

where x(d) is the dth component of x . We obtain the projection as

*


with coordinates

*
x˜* = BB?x*	(10.59)

z* = B?x*	(10.60)

with respect to the basis of the principal subspace. Here, B is the ma- trix that contains the eigenvectors that are associated with the largest eigenvalues of the data covariance matrix as columns. PCA returns the coordinates (10.60), not the projections x*.

  Having standardized our dataset, (10.59) only yields the projections in the context of the standardized dataset. To obtain our projection in the original data space (i.e., before standardization), we need to undo the standardization (10.58) and multiply by the standard deviation before adding the mean so that we obtain
x˜(d) ? x˜(d)sd + µd ,	d = 1, . . . , D .	(10.61)
Figure 10.11(f) illustrates the projection in the original data space.

Example 10.4 (MNIST Digits: Reconstruction)
In the following, we will apply PCA to the MNIST digits dataset, which contains 60,000 examples of handwritten digits 0 through 9. Each digit is an image of size 28 28, i.e., it contains 784 pixels so that we can interpret every image in this dataset as a vector x R784. Examples of these digits are shown in Figure 10.3.


Figure 10.12 Effect of increasing the number of principal components on reconstruction.


Original PCs: 1

PCs: 10

PCs: 100

PCs: 500


  For illustration purposes, we apply PCA to a subset of the MNIST digits, and we focus on the digit "8". We used 5,389 training images of the digit "8" and determined the principal subspace as detailed in this chapter. We then used the learned projection matrix to reconstruct a set of test im- ages, which is illustrated in Figure 10.12. The first row of Figure 10.12 shows a set of four original digits from the test set. The following rows show reconstructions of exactly these digits when using a principal sub- space of dimensions 1, 10, 100, and 500, respectively. We see that even with a single-dimensional principal subspace we get a halfway decent re- construction of the original digits, which, however, is blurry and generic. With an increasing number of principal components (PCs), the reconstruc- tions become sharper and more details are accounted for. With 500 prin-





















Figure 10.13 Average squared reconstruction error as a function of the number of principal components. The average squared reconstruction error is the sum of the eigenvalues in the orthogonal complement of the principal subspace.



10.7 Latent Variable Perspective
In the previous sections, we derived PCA without any notion of a prob- abilistic model using the maximum-variance and the projection perspec- tives. On the one hand, this approach may be appealing as it allows us to sidestep all the mathematical difficulties that come with probability the- ory, but on the other hand, a probabilistic model would offer us more flex- ibility and useful insights. More specifically, a probabilistic model would
Come with a likelihood function, and we can explicitly deal with noisy observations (which we did not even discuss earlier)
Allow us to do Bayesian model comparison via the marginal likelihood as discussed in Section 8.6
View PCA as a generative model, which allows us to simulate new data
















probabilistic PCA

Allow us to make straightforward connections to related algorithms Deal with data dimensions that are missing at random by applying Bayes' theorem
Give us a notion of the novelty of a new data point
Give us a principled way to extend the model, e.g., to a mixture of PCA models
Have the PCA we derived in earlier sections as a special case
Allow for a fully Bayesian treatment by marginalizing out the model parameters
By introducing a continuous-valued latent variable z RM it is possible to phrase PCA as a probabilistic latent-variable model. Tipping and Bishop (1999) proposed this latent-variable model as probabilistic PCA (PPCA).

PPCA	PPCA addresses most of the aforementioned issues, and the PCA solution that we obtained by maximizing the variance in the projected space or by minimizing the reconstruction error is obtained as the special case of maximum likelihood estimation in a noise-free setting.

10.7.1 Generative Process and Probabilistic Model
In PPCA, we explicitly write down the probabilistic model for linear di- mensionality reduction. For this we assume a continuous latent variable z RM with a standard-normal prior p(z) = 0, I and a linear rela- tionship between the latent variables and the observed x data where
x = Bz + µ + ? ? RD ,	(10.63)
where ?	0, s2I is Gaussian observation noise and B  RD×M and µ RD describe the linear/affine mapping from latent to observed variables. Therefore, PPCA links latent and observed variables via
           p(x|z, B, µ, s2) = N x | Bz + µ, s2I .	(10.64) Overall, PPCA induces the following generative process:
zn ~ N(z | 0, I)	)	(10.65)




ancestral sampling

To generate a data point that is typical given the model parameters, we follow an ancestral sampling scheme: We first sample a latent variable zn from p(z). Then we use zn in (10.64) to sample a data point conditioned on the sampled zn, i.e., xn  p(x zn, B, µ, s2).
  This generative process allows us to write down the probabilistic model (i.e., the joint distribution of all random variables; see Section 8.4) as
            p(x, z|B, µ, s2) = p(x|z, B, µ, s2)p(z) ,	(10.67)
which immediately gives rise to the graphical model in Figure 10.14 using the results from Section 8.5.


Figure 10.14 Graphical model for probabilistic PCA. The observations xn
B	µ	explicitly depend on
corresponding
latent variables
s	zn	0, I . The
model parameters B, µ and the likelihood
parameter s are

Remark. Note the direction of the arrow that connects the latent variables z and the observed data x: The arrow points from z to x, which means that the PPCA model assumes a lower-dimensional latent cause z for high- dimensional observations x. In the end, we are obviously interested in finding something out about z given some observations. To get there we will apply Bayesian inference to "invert" the arrow implicitly and go from observations to latent variables.	?

shared across the dataset.





Figure 10.15 Generating new MNIST digits. The latent variables z can be used to generate new data x˜ = Bz. The closer we stay to the training data, the more realistic the generated data.


The likelihood does not depend on the latent variables z.
10.7.2 
Likelihood and Joint Distribution
Using the results from Chapter 6, we obtain the likelihood of this proba- bilistic model by integrating out the latent variable z (see Section 8.4.3) so that
p(x | B, µ, s2) = - p(x | z, B, µ, s2)p(z)dz	(10.68a)
= - N x | Bz + µ, s2I N z | 0, I dz .	(10.68b)
From Section 6.5, we know that the solution to this integral is a Gaussian distribution with mean
Ex[x] = Ez[Bz + µ] + E?[?] = µ	(10.69)
and with covariance matrix
V[x] = Vz[Bz + µ] + V?[?] = Vz[Bz] + s2I	(10.70a)
= BVz[z]B? + s2I = BB? + s2I .	(10.70b)
The likelihood in (10.68b) can be used for maximum likelihood or MAP estimation of the model parameters.
Remark. We cannot use the conditional distribution in (10.64) for maxi- mum likelihood estimation as it still depends on the latent variables. The likelihood function we require for maximum likelihood (or MAP) estima- tion should only be a function of the data x and the model parameters, but must not depend on the latent variables.	?
  From Section 6.5, we know that a Gaussian random variable z and a linear/affine transformation x = Bz of it are jointly Gaussian dis- tributed. We already know the marginals p(z) =  z 0, I and p(x) = N x | µ, BB? + s2I . The missing cross-covariance is given as
Cov[x, z] = Covz[Bz + µ] = B Covz[z, z] = B .	(10.71)
Therefore, the probabilistic model of PPCA, i.e., the joint distribution of latent and observed random variables is explicitly given by

2	((xl 1 (µl

(BB? + s2I	Bli

p(x, z | B, µ, s ) = N

z  1 0

B?	I

,	(10.72)

with a mean vector of length D + M and a covariance matrix of size
(D + M ) × (D + M ).

10.7.3 Posterior Distribution
The joint Gaussian distribution p(x, z | B, µ, s2) in (10.72) allows us to determine the posterior distribution p(z | x) immediately by applying the

rules of Gaussian conditioning from Section 6.5.1. The posterior distribu- tion of the latent variable given an observation x is then
p(z | x) = N z | m, C ,		(10.73) m = B?(BB? + s2I)-1(x - µ) ,		(10.74) C = I - B?(BB? + s2I)-1B .	(10.75)
Note that the posterior covariance does not depend on the observed data
x. For a new observation x* in data space, we use (10.73) to determine the posterior distribution of the corresponding latent variable z*. The co- variance matrix C allows us to assess how confident the embedding is. A covariance matrix C with a small determinant (which measures volumes) tells us that the latent embedding z* is fairly certain. If we obtain a pos- terior distribution p(z* x*) with much variance, we may be faced with an outlier. However, we can explore this posterior distribution to under- stand what other data points x are plausible under this posterior. To do this, we exploit the generative process underlying PPCA, which allows us to explore the posterior distribution on the latent variables by generating new data that is plausible under this posterior:
1. Sample a latent variable z* p(z x*) from the posterior distribution over the latent variables (10.73).
2. Sample a reconstructed vector x˜* ~ p(x | z*, B, µ, s2) from (10.64).
If we repeat this process many times, we can explore the posterior dis- tribution (10.73) on the latent variables z* and its implications on the observed data. The sampling process effectively hypothesizes data, which is plausible under the posterior distribution.

10.8 Further Reading
We derived PCA from two perspectives: (a) maximizing the variance in the projected space; (b) minimizing the average reconstruction error. How- ever, PCA can also be interpreted from different perspectives. Let us recap what we have done: We took high-dimensional data x  RD and used a matrix B? to find a lower-dimensional representation z RM . The columns of B are the eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix S that are associated with the largest eigenvalues. Once we have a low-dimensional representation z, we can get a high-dimensional version of it (in the orig-

inal data space) as x
projection matrix.

x˜ = Bz = BB?x ? RD, where BB? is a

We can also think of PCA as a linear auto-encoder as illustrated in Fig-	auto-encoder
ure 10.16. An auto-encoder encodes the data xn	RD to a code zn	RM	code
and decodes it to a x˜n similar to xn. The mapping from the data to the
code is called the encoder, and the mapping from the code back to the orig-	encoder
inal data space is called the decoder. If we consider linear mappings where	decoder


Figure 10.16 PCA can be viewed as a linear auto-encoder.
It encodes the high-dimensional data x into a lower-dimensional representation
(code) z ? RM and decodes z using a decoder. The decoded vector x˜ is the orthogonal projection of the original data x onto the M -dimensional principal subspace.

Original

Encoder	Decoder


the code is given by zn = B?xn RM and we are interested in minimiz- ing the average squared error between the data xn and its reconstruction x˜n = Bzn, n = 1, . . . , N , we obtain


1 L	1 L 1	1
	
 	 










recognition network

This means we end up with the same objective function as in (10.29) that we discussed in Section 10.3 so that we obtain the PCA solution when we minimize the squared auto-encoding loss. If we replace the linear map- ping of PCA with a nonlinear mapping, we get a nonlinear auto-encoder. A prominent example of this is a deep auto-encoder where the linear func- tions are replaced with deep neural networks. In this context, the encoder is also known as a recognition network or inference network, whereas the

inference network   decoder is also called a generator.
generator		Another interpretation of PCA is related to information theory. We can think of the code as a smaller or compressed version of the original data point. When we reconstruct our original data using the code, we do not get the exact data point back, but a slightly distorted or noisy version

The code is a compressed version of the original data.

of it. This means that our compression is "lossy". Intuitively, we want to maximize the correlation between the original data and the lower- dimensional code. More formally, this is related to the mutual information. We would then get the same solution to PCA we discussed in Section 10.3 by maximizing the mutual information, a core concept in information the- ory (MacKay, 2003).
  In our discussion on PPCA, we assumed that the parameters of the model, i.e., B, µ, and the likelihood parameter s2, are known. Tipping and Bishop (1999) describe how to derive maximum likelihood estimates for these parameters in the PPCA setting (note that we use a different notation in this chapter). The maximum likelihood parameters, when pro-

jecting D-dimensional data onto an M -dimensional subspace, are

1
µML = N


N
xn
n=1


,	(10.77)

BML = T (? - s I) 2 R ,
D

(10.78)

	1	
2  =
D - M

?j
j=M +1

,	(10.79)

where T ? RD×M contains M eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix,	The matrix ? - s2I

? = diag(?1, . . . , ?M )  RM×M is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues associated with the principal axes on its diagonal, and R  RM×M is an arbitrary orthogonal matrix. The maximum likelihood solution BML is unique up to an arbitrary orthogonal transformation, e.g., we can right- multiply BML with any rotation matrix R so that (10.78) essentially is a singular value decomposition (see Section 4.5). An outline of the proof is given by Tipping and Bishop (1999).
  The maximum likelihood estimate for µ given in (10.77) is the sample mean of the data. The maximum likelihood estimator for the observation noise variance s2 given in (10.79) is the average variance in the orthog- onal complement of the principal subspace, i.e., the average leftover vari- ance that we cannot capture with the first M principal components is treated as observation noise.
  In the noise-free limit where s  0, PPCA and PCA provide identical solutions: Since the data covariance matrix S is symmetric, it can be di- agonalized (see Section 4.4), i.e., there exists a matrix T of eigenvectors of S so that

in (10.78) is guaranteed to be positive semidefinite as the smallest eigenvalue of the data covariance matrix is bounded from below by the noise variance s2.

S = T ?T -1 .	(10.80)
In the PPCA model, the data covariance matrix is the covariance matrix of the Gaussian likelihood p(x B, µ, s2), which is BB?+s2I, see (10.70b). For s  0, we obtain BB? so that this data covariance must equal the PCA data covariance (and its factorization given in (10.80)) so that
Cov[X] = T ?T -1 = BB? ?? B = T ? 2 R ,	(10.81)
i.e., we obtain the maximum likelihood estimate in (10.78) for s = 0. From (10.78) and (10.80), it becomes clear that (P)PCA performs a de- composition of the data covariance matrix.
  In a streaming setting, where data arrives sequentially, it is recom- mended to use the iterative expectation maximization (EM) algorithm for maximum likelihood estimation (Roweis, 1998).
  To determine the dimensionality of the latent variables (the length of the code, the dimensionality of the lower-dimensional subspace onto which we project the data), Gavish and Donoho (2014) suggest the heuristic that, if we can estimate the noise variance s2 of the data, we should



discard all singular values smaller than	v3 . Alternatively, we can use











Bayesian PCA













factor analysis


An overly flexible likelihood would be able to explain more than just the noise.





independent

(nested) cross-validation (Section 8.6.1) or Bayesian model selection cri- teria (discussed in Section 8.6.2) to determine a good estimate of the intrinsic dimensionality of the data (Minka, 2001b).
  Similar to our discussion on linear regression in Chapter 9, we can place a prior distribution on the parameters of the model and integrate them out. By doing so, we (a) avoid point estimates of the parameters and the issues that come with these point estimates (see Section 8.6) and (b) al- low for an automatic selection of the appropriate dimensionality M of the latent space. In this Bayesian PCA, which was proposed by Bishop (1999), a prior p(µ, B, s2) is placed on the model parameters. The generative process allows us to integrate the model parameters out instead of condi- tioning on them, which addresses overfitting issues. Since this integration is analytically intractable, Bishop (1999) proposes to use approximate in- ference methods, such as MCMC or variational inference. We refer to the work by Gilks et al. (1996) and Blei et al. (2017) for more details on these approximate inference techniques.
In PPCA, we considered the linear model p(xn | zn) = N(xn | Bzn +
are affected by the same amount of noise. If we allow each observation dimension d to have a different variance s2, we obtain factor analysis (FA) (Spearman, 1904; Bartholomew et al., 2011). This means that FA gives the likelihood some more flexibility than PPCA, but still forces the data to be explained by the model parameters B, µ.However, FA no longer allows for a closed-form maximum likelihood solution so that we need to use an iterative scheme, such as the expectation maximization algorithm, to estimate the model parameters. While in PPCA all station- ary points are global optima, this no longer holds for FA. Compared to PPCA, FA does not change if we scale the data, but it does return different solutions if we rotate the data.
An algorithm that is also closely related to PCA is independent com-

component analysis	ponent analysis (ICA (Hyvarinen et al., 2001)). Starting again with the ICA	latent-variable perspective p(xn zn) =	xn Bzn + µ, s2I  we now change the prior on zn to non-Gaussian distributions. ICA can be used

blind-source

for blind-source separation. Imagine you are in a busy train station with

separation	many people talking. Your ears play the role of microphones, and they linearly mix different speech signals in the train station. The goal of blind- source separation is to identify the constituent parts of the mixed signals. As discussed previously in the context of maximum likelihood estimation for PPCA, the original PCA solution is invariant to any rotation. Therefore, PCA can identify the best lower-dimensional subspace in which the sig- nals live, but not the signals themselves (Murphy, 2012). ICA addresses this issue by modifying the prior distribution p(z) on the latent sources

to require non-Gaussian priors p(z). We refer to the books by Hyvarinen et al. (2001) and Murphy (2012) for more details on ICA.
  PCA, factor analysis, and ICA are three examples for dimensionality re- duction with linear models. Cunningham and Ghahramani (2015) provide a broader survey of linear dimensionality reduction.
  The (P)PCA model we discussed here allows for several important ex- tensions. In Section 10.5, we explained how to do PCA when the in- put dimensionality D is significantly greater than the number N of data points. By exploiting the insight that PCA can be performed by computing (many) inner products, this idea can be pushed to the extreme by consid-
ering infinite-dimensional features. The kernel trick is the basis of kernel  kernel trick

PCA and allows us to implicitly compute inner products between infinite- dimensional features (Scho¨lkopf et al., 1998; Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002). There are nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques that are de- rived from PCA (Burges (2010) provides a good overview). The auto- encoder perspective of PCA that we discussed previously in this section

kernel PCA

can be used to render PCA as a special case of a deep auto-encoder. In the  deep auto-encoder
deep auto-encoder, both the encoder and the decoder are represented by multilayer feedforward neural networks, which themselves are nonlinear mappings. If we set the activation functions in these neural networks to be the identity, the model becomes equivalent to PCA. A different approach to
nonlinear dimensionality reduction is the Gaussian process latent-variable  Gaussian process

model (GP-LVM) proposed by Lawrence (2005). The GP-LVM starts off with the latent-variable perspective that we used to derive PPCA and replaces the linear relationship between the latent variables z and the observations x with a Gaussian process (GP). Instead of estimating the parameters of the mapping (as we do in PPCA), the GP-LVM marginalizes out the model parameters and makes point estimates of the latent variables z. Similar

latent-variable model
GP-LVM

to Bayesian PCA, the Bayesian GP-LVM proposed by Titsias and Lawrence	Bayesian GP-LVM
(2010) maintains a distribution on the latent variables z and uses approx- imate inference to integrate them out as well.




11


Density Estimation with Gaussian Mixture Models


In earlier chapters, we covered already two fundamental problems in machine learning: regression (Chapter 9) and dimensionality reduction (Chapter 10). In this chapter, we will have a look at a third pillar of ma- chine learning: density estimation. On our journey, we introduce impor- tant concepts, such as the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm and a latent variable perspective of density estimation with mixture models.
  When we apply machine learning to data we often aim to represent data in some way. A straightforward way is to take the data points them- selves as the representation of the data; see Figure 11.1 for an example. However, this approach may be unhelpful if the dataset is huge or if we are interested in representing characteristics of the data. In density esti- mation, we represent the data compactly using a density from a paramet- ric family, e.g., a Gaussian or Beta distribution. For example, we may be looking for the mean and variance of a dataset in order to represent the data compactly using a Gaussian distribution. The mean and variance can be found using tools we discussed in Section 8.3: maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori estimation. We can then use the mean and variance of this Gaussian to represent the distribution underlying the data, i.e., we think of the dataset to be a typical realization from this distribution if we were to sample from it.


Figure 11.1
Two-dimensional dataset that cannot be meaningfully represented by a Gaussian.



4

2

0

-2
-4

5	0	5
x1


348
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.

11.1 Gaussian Mixture Model	349
  In practice, the Gaussian (or similarly all other distributions we encoun- tered so far) have limited modeling capabilities. For example, a Gaussian approximation of the density that generated the data in Figure 11.1 would be a poor approximation. In the following, we will look at a more ex- pressive family of distributions, which we can use for density estimation:
mixture models.	mixture model
  Mixture models can be used to describe a distribution p(x) by a convex combination of K simple (base) distributions

K
p(x) =	pkpk(x)	(11.1)
k=1


0 ? pk ? 1 ,

K
pk = 1 ,	(11.2)
k=1

where the components pk are members of a family of basic distributions,
e.g., Gaussians, Bernoullis, or Gammas, and the pk are mixture weights.  mixture weight
Mixture models are more expressive than the corresponding base distri- butions because they allow for multimodal data representations, i.e., they can describe datasets with multiple "clusters", such as the example in Fig- ure 11.1.
  We will focus on Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), where the basic distributions are Gaussians. For a given dataset, we aim to maximize the likelihood of the model parameters to train the GMM. For this purpose, we will use results from Chapter 5, Chapter 6, and Section 7.2. However, unlike other applications we discussed earlier (linear regression or PCA), we will not find a closed-form maximum likelihood solution. Instead, we will arrive at a set of dependent simultaneous equations, which we can only solve iteratively.

11.1 Gaussian Mixture Model
A Gaussian mixture model is a density model where we combine a finite	Gaussian mixture

number of K Gaussian distributions N(x | µk, Sk) so that

p(x | ?) =	pkN x | µk, Sk	(11.3)
k=1

model


0 ? pk ? 1 ,

K
pk = 1 ,	(11.4)
k=1

where we defined ? :=  µk, Sk, pk : k = 1, . . . , K  as the collection of all parameters of the model. This convex combination of Gaussian distri- bution gives us significantly more flexibility for modeling complex densi- ties than a simple Gaussian distribution (which we recover from (11.3) for K = 1). An illustration is given in Figure 11.2, displaying the weighted



Figure 11.2 Gaussian mixture model. The Gaussian mixture distribution (black) is composed of a convex combination of Gaussian distributions and is more expressive than any individual component. Dashed lines represent the weighted Gaussian components.

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00










-4	-2	0	2	4	6	8


components and the mixture density, which is given as
p(x | ?) = 0.5N(x | - 2, 1 ) + 0.2N(x | 1, 2) + 0.3N(x | 4, 1) .  (11.5)

11.2 Parameter Learning via Maximum Likelihood
Assume we are given a dataset   =  x1, . . . , xN , where xn, n = 1, . . . , N , are drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution p(x). Our ob- jective is to find a good approximation/representation of this unknown distribution p(x) by means of a GMM with K mixture components. The parameters of the GMM are the K means µk, the covariances Sk, and mixture weights pk. We summarize all these free parameters in ? :=
{pk, µk, Sk : k = 1, . . . , K}.





Figure 11.3 Initial setting: GMM (black) with mixture three mixture components (dashed) and seven data points (discs).



  In the following, we detail how to obtain a maximum likelihood esti- mate ?ML of the model parameters ?. We start by writing down the like- lihood, i.e., the predictive distribution of the training data given the pa- rameters. We exploit our i.i.d. assumption, which leads to the factorized likelihood
N	K
p(X | ?) = IT p(xn | ?) ,	p(xn | ?) = L pkN(xn | µk, Sk) ,	(11.9)
	
where every individual likelihood term p(xn ?) is a Gaussian mixture density. Then we obtain the log-likelihood as

N	N	K
log p(X | ?) = L log p(xn | ?) = L log L pkN(xn | µk, Sk) . (11.10)

n=1

n=1

k=1

=..:,,L	..

We aim to find parameters ?*ML that maximize the log-likelihood defined in (11.10). Our "normal" procedure would be to compute the gradient d /d? of the log-likelihood with respect to the model parameters ?, set it to 0, and solve for ?. However, unlike our previous examples for max- imum likelihood estimation (e.g., when we discussed linear regression in Section 9.2), we cannot obtain a closed-form solution. However, we can exploit an iterative scheme to find good model parameters ?ML, which will turn out to be the EM algorithm for GMMs. The key idea is to update one model parameter at a time while keeping the others fixed.
Remark. If we were to consider a single Gaussian as the desired density, the sum over k in (11.10) vanishes, and the log can be applied directly to the Gaussian component, such that we get
log N(x | µ, S) = - D log(2p) - 1 log det(S) - 1 (x - µ)?S-1(x - µ).

This simple form allows us to find closed-form maximum likelihood esti- mates of µ and S, as discussed in Chapter 8. In (11.10), we cannot move

the log into the sum over k so that we cannot obtain a simple closed-form maximum likelihood solution.	?
  Any local optimum of a function exhibits the property that its gradi- ent with respect to the parameters must vanish (necessary condition); see Chapter 7. In our case, we obtain the following necessary conditions when we optimize the log-likelihood in (11.10) with respect to the GMM param- eters µk, Sk, pk:

?
= 0? ??

L ? log p(xn | ?) = 0? ,	(11.12)

?µk

n=1 N

?µk

?
= 0 ??

L ? log p(xn | ?) = 0 ,	(11.13)

?Sk

n=1
N

?Sk

?
= 0 ??

L ? log p(xn | ?) = 0 .	(11.14)



For all three necessary conditions, by applying the chain rule (see Sec- tion 5.2.2), we require partial derivatives of the form

? log p(xn | ?) =	1

?p(xn | ?) ,	(11.15)

??	p(xn | ?)	??
where ? = {µk, Sk, pk, k = 1, . . . , K} are the model parameters and

1


p(xn | ?)	 K

1
p N(x

| µ , S )

.	(11.16)

In the following, we will compute the partial derivatives (11.12) through (11.14). But before we do this, we introduce a quantity that will play a central role in the remainder of this chapter: responsibilities.




We define the quantity

r
11.2.1 
Responsibilities

:=   pkN(xn | µk, Sk)







(11.17)




responsibility





rn follows a Boltzmann/Gibbs distribution.

as the responsibility of the kth mixture component for the nth data point. The responsibility rnk of the kth mixture component for data point xn is proportional to the likelihood
              p(xn | pk, µk, Sk) = pkN  xn | µk, Sk	(11.18)
of the mixture component given the data point. Therefore, mixture com- ponents have a high responsibility for a data point when the data point could be a plausible sample from that mixture component. Note that rn := [rn1, . . . , rnK]? ? RK is a (normalized) probability vector, i.e.,

  k rnk = 1 with rnk ? 0. This probability vector distributes probabil- ity mass among the K mixture components, and we can think of rn as a
"soft assignment" of xn to the K mixture components. Therefore, the re-	The responsibility

sponsibility rnk from (11.17) represents the probability that xn has been generated by the kth mixture component.

rnk is the probability that the kth mixture component generated the nth data point.





















  In the following, we determine the updates of the model parameters µk, Sk, pk for given responsibilities. We will see that the update equa- tions all depend on the responsibilities, which makes a closed-form solu- tion to the maximum likelihood estimation problem impossible. However, for given responsibilities we will be updating one model parameter at a time, while keeping the others fixed. After this, we will recompute the responsibilities. Iterating these two steps will eventually converge to a lo- cal optimum and is a specific instantiation of the EM algorithm. We will discuss this in some more detail in Section 11.3.

11.2.2 Updating the Means
Theorem 11.1 (Update of the GMM Means). The update of the mean pa- rameters µk, k = 1, . . . , K, of the GMM is given by


new


  N	r  x


where the responsibilities rnk are defined in (11.17).

Remark. The update of the means µk of the individual mixture compo- nents in (11.20) depends on all means, covariance matrices Sk, and mix- ture weights pk via rnk given in (11.17). Therefore, we cannot obtain a closed-form solution for all µk at once.	?
Proof From (11.15), we see that the gradient of the log-likelihood with respect to the mean parameters µk, k = 1, . . . , K, requires us to compute the partial derivative

?p(xn

| ?) = L

p ?N(xn | µj, Sj) = p

?N(xn | µk, Sk)


(11.21a)

?µk

j
j=1

?µk


k	?µ

= pk(xn - µ )?S-1N(xn | µ , Sk) ,	(11.21b)
where we exploited that only the kth mixture component depends on µk.
We use our result from (11.21b) in (11.15) and put everything together
so that the desired partial derivative of L with respect to µk is given as
N	N

?L = L ? log p(xn | ?) = L 	1	 ?p(xn | ?)



(11.22a)

L	pkN(xn | µ , Sk)

=	(x


- µ )?S-1

(11.22b)



N	..	..,,	..
=rnk
= L rnk(xn - µ )?S-1 .	(11.22c)
Here we used the identity from (11.16) and the result of the partial deriva- tive in (11.21b) to get to (11.22b). The values rnk are the responsibilities we defined in (11.17).
We now solve (11.22c) for µnew so that ?L(µnew ) = 0? and obtain
k	?µk
L	L	 N	r  x	1	L


n=1


 
n=1

N
n=1

rnk


n=1




(11.23)

where we defined




N
Nk :=	rnk	(11.24)
n=1

as the total responsibility of the kth mixture component for the entire dataset. This concludes the proof of Theorem 11.1.
  Intuitively, (11.20) can be interpreted as an importance-weighted Monte Carlo estimate of the mean, where the importance weights of data point xn are the responsibilities rnk of the kth cluster for xn, k = 1, . . . , K.

Therefore, the mean µk is pulled toward a data point xn with strength	Figure 11.4 Update

given by rnk. The means are pulled stronger toward data points for which the corresponding mixture component has a high responsibility, i.e., a high likelihood. Figure 11.4 illustrates this. We can also interpret the mean up- date in (11.20) as the expected value of all data points under the distri- bution given by
                   rk := [r1k, . . . , rNk]?/Nk ,	(11.25) which is a normalized probability vector, i.e.,
µk ? Erk [X] .	(11.26)

of the mean parameter of mixture component in a GMM. The mean µ is being pulled toward individual data points with the weights given by the corresponding responsibilities.
x2	x3


x1
µ
Figure 11.5 Effect of updating the mean values in a GMM. (a) GMM
before updating the mean values;
(b) GMM after updating the mean values µk while retaining the variances and mixture weights.
















  The update of the mean parameters in (11.20) look fairly straight- forward. However, note that the responsibilities rnk are a function of pj, µj, Sj for all j = 1, . . . , K, such that the updates in (11.20) depend on all parameters of the GMM, and a closed-form solution, which we ob- tained for linear regression in Section 9.2 or PCA in Chapter 10, cannot be obtained.

11.2.3 Updating the Covariances
Theorem 11.2 (Updates of the GMM Covariances). The update of the co- variance parameters Sk, k = 1, . . . , K of the GMM is given by


Snew =  1  L r



(x - µ )(x

- µ )? ,	(11.30)

where rnk and Nk are defined in (11.17) and (11.24), respectively.
Proof To prove Theorem 11.2, our approach is to compute the partial derivatives of the log-likelihood with respect to the covariances Sk, set them to 0, and solve for Sk. We start with our general approach

N	N
?L  = L ? log p(xn | ?) = L 	1	 ?p(xn | ?) .	(11.31)
We already know 1/p(xn ?) from (11.16). To obtain the remaining par- tial derivative ?p(xn ?)/?Sk, we write down the definition of the Gaus- sian distribution p(xn ?) (see (11.9)) and drop all terms but the kth. We then obtain

?p(xn | ?)
?Sk


(11.32a)

=	?	(p (2p)- D det(S )- 1 exp (- 1 (x




- µ )?S-1(x

- µ ))i

= p (2p)- D ( ?	det(S )- 1 exp (- 1 (x - µ )?S-1(x

- µ ))



1	(
+ det(S )-	exp - 1 (x  - µ )?S-1(x



- µ ))l .	(11.32c)

We now use the identities

?	det(S )- 1 (5.101)


1 det(S )- 1 S-1 ,	(11.33)




?Sk

k	2	=	- 2

k	2	k

 ? 
(x  - µ )?S-1(x  -

(5.103) -S-1(x

- µ )(x

- µ )?S-1

?Sk

k	k	n

µk)	=

k	n	k	n

k	k
(11.34)

and obtain (after some rearranging) the desired partial derivative required in (11.31) as

?p(xn | ?) = p

N(x

| µ , S )

· [- 1 (S-1 - S-1(xn - µ )(xn - µ )?S-1)] .	(11.35)
Putting everything together, the partial derivative of the log-likelihood

with respect to Sk is given by

N	N

?L = L ? log p(xn | ?) = L 	1	 ?p(xn | ?)

(11.36a)

= L 	pkN(xn | µk, Sk)
  K  p N(x | µ , S )

n=1	j=1

[

j	n	j	j
=..r,,nk	..	]


= - 1 L r  (S-1 - S-1(x  - µ )(x  - µ )?S-1)	(11.36c)

nk	k
n=1
1 L



k	n	k	n	k	k
1	(LN



2 k	2	k
.. =..N,,k ..


n=1

k	k	k



(11.36d)

We see that the responsibilities rnk also appear in this partial derivative. Setting this partial derivative to 0, we obtain the necessary optimality condition


NkS-1 = S-1

(LN

rnk(xn - µ )(xn - µ )?	S-1


(11.37a)

k	k
(LN


n=1

k	k	k

k
n=1
By solving for Sk, we obtain
Snew =  1  L r  (x



k





- µ )(x

k





- µ )? ,	(11.38)

where rk is the probability vector defined in (11.25). This gives us a sim- ple update rule for Sk for k = 1, . . . , K and proves Theorem 11.2.
  Similar to the update of µk in (11.20), we can interpret the update of the covariance in (11.30) as an importance-weighted expected value of the square of the centered data X˜k := {x1 - µk, . . . , xN - µk}.











Figure 11.6 Effect of updating the variances in a GMM.
(a) GMM before updating the variances; (b) GMM after updating the variances while retaining the means and mixture weights.




  Similar to the update of the mean parameters, we can interpret (11.30) as a Monte Carlo estimate of the weighted covariance of data points xn associated with the kth mixture component, where the weights are the responsibilities rnk. As with the updates of the mean parameters, this up- date depends on all pj, µj, Sj, j = 1, . . . , K, through the responsibilities rnk, which prohibits a closed-form solution.


11.2.4 Updating the Mixture Weights
Theorem 11.3 (Update of the GMM Mixture Weights). The mixture weights of the GMM are updated as
pnew = Nk ,	k = 1, . . . , K ,	(11.42)
k	N
where N is the number of data points and Nk is defined in (11.24).
Proof To find the partial derivative of the log-likelihood with respect to the weight parameters pk, k = 1, . . . , K, we account for the con- straint k pk = 1 by using Lagrange multipliers (see Section 7.2). The Lagrangian is


L = L + ?

K


k=1

pk - 1


(11.43a)





=
n=1


log

Lk=1

pkN

(xn | µk, Sk) + ?

K


k=1

pk - 1


,	(11.43b)

where	is the log-likelihood from (11.10) and the second term encodes for the equality constraint that all the mixture weights need to sum up to
1. We obtain the partial derivative with respect to pk as

?L = L

	N(xn | µk, Sk)	+ ?	(11.44a)



?pk

  K  p N(x | µ , S )

= 1 L

	pkN(xn | µk, Sk)	+? =

Nk + ? ,	(11.44b)

pk	 K

p N(x

| µ , S )	pk

n=1

j=1

j	n	j	j
=..N,,k	..





?L = L p


- 1 .	(11.45)

Setting both partial derivatives to 0 (necessary condition for optimum) yields the system of equations
p =	Nk ,	(11.46)
k	?
K
1 =	pk .	(11.47)
k=1
Using (11.46) in (11.47) and solving for pk, we obtain

L p = 1 ?? - L Nk = 1 ?? - N

= 1 ?? ? = -N .

k
k=1

?	?
k=1


(11.48)

This allows us to substitute -N for ? in (11.46) to obtain
pnew = Nk ,	(11.49)
k	N
which gives us the update for the weight parameters pk and proves Theo- rem 11.3.
  We can identify the mixture weight in (11.42) as the ratio of the to- tal responsibility of the kth cluster and the number of data points. Since N =  k Nk, the number of data points can also be interpreted as the total responsibility of all mixture components together, such that pk is the relative importance of the kth mixture component for the dataset.

Remark. Since Nk

N
i=1

rnk

, the update equation (11.42) for the mix-

ture weights pk also depends on all pj, µj, Sj, j = 1, . . . , K via the re- sponsibilities rnk.	?


Example 11.5 (Weight Parameter Updates)


Figure 11.7 Effect of updating the mixture weights in a GMM. (a) GMM
before updating the mixture weights;
(b) GMM after updating the mixture weights while retaining the



0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00



  p1N (x|µ1, s2)
  p2N (x|µ2, s2)
  p3N (x|µ3, s2)
GMM density












-4	-2	0	2	4	6	8




0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00



  p1N (x|µ1, s2)
  p2N (x|µ2, s2)
  p3N (x|µ3, s2)
GMM density












-4	-2	0	2	4	6	8

means and variances. Note the different scales of

(a) GMM density and individual components prior to updating the mixture weights.

(b) GMM density and individual components after updating the mixture weights.

the vertical axes.
  
In our running example from Figure 11.3, the mixture weights are up- dated as follows:

p1 : 1 ? 0.29	(11.50)
p2 : 1 ? 0.29	(11.51)
p3 : 1 ? 0.42	(11.52)
Here we see that the third component gets more weight/importance, while the other components become slightly less important. Figure 11.7 illustrates the effect of updating the mixture weights. Figure 11.7(a) is identical to Figure 11.6(b) and shows the GMM density and its individual components prior to updating the mixture weights. Figure 11.7(b) shows the GMM density after updating the mixture weights.
  Overall, having updated the means, the variances, and the weights once, we obtain the GMM shown in Figure 11.7(b). Compared with the initialization shown in Figure 11.3, we can see that the parameter updates caused the GMM density to shift some of its mass toward the data points. After updating the means, variances, and weights once, the GMM fit in Figure 11.7(b) is already remarkably better than its initialization from Figure 11.3. This is also evidenced by the log-likelihood values, which in- creased from 28.3 (initialization) to 14.4 after one complete update cycle.












EM algorithm
11.3 
EM Algorithm
Unfortunately, the updates in (11.20), (11.30), and (11.42) do not consti- tute a closed-form solution for the updates of the parameters µk, Sk, pk of the mixture model because the responsibilities rnk depend on those pa- rameters in a complex way. However, the results suggest a simple iterative scheme for finding a solution to the parameters estimation problem via maximum likelihood. The expectation maximization algorithm (EM algo-

11.3 EM Algorithm	361
rithm) was proposed by Dempster et al. (1977) and is a general iterative scheme for learning parameters (maximum likelihood or MAP) in mixture models and, more generally, latent-variable models.
  In our example of the Gaussian mixture model, we choose initial values for µk, Sk, pk and alternate until convergence between
E-step: Evaluate the responsibilities rnk (posterior probability of data point n belonging to mixture component k).
M-step: Use the updated responsibilities to reestimate the parameters
µk, Sk, pk.
Every step in the EM algorithm increases the log-likelihood function (Neal and Hinton, 1999). For convergence, we can check the log-likelihood or the parameters directly. A concrete instantiation of the EM algorithm for estimating the parameters of a GMM is as follows:
1. Initialize µk, Sk, pk.
2. E-step: Evaluate responsibilities rnk for every data point xn using cur-
rent parameters pk, µk, Sk:

pkN(xn | µk, Sk)


(11.53)

nk	  p N(x | µ , S ) .
3. M-step: Reestimate parameters pk, µk, Sk using the current responsi-
bilities rnk (from E-step):	Having updated the

N
µk =		rnkxn Nk n=1
N


,	(11.54)

means µk
in (11.54), they are subsequently used in (11.55) to update
the corresponding

S =  1 	r
Nk n=1

(xn

- µk)(xn

- µk)? ,	(11.55)

covariances.

p  = Nk .	(11.56)
k	N




Figure 11.8 EM algorithm applied to the GMM from Figure 11.2. (a) Final GMM fit;
(b) negative
log-likelihood as a function of the EM iteration.

Figure 11.9 Illustration of the EM algorithm for fitting a Gaussian mixture model with three components to a two-dimensional dataset. (a) Dataset;
(b) negative
log-likelihood

10


5


0


-5

-10 10	-5	0	5	10


104



6 × 103


4 × 103














0	20	40	60

-
(lower is better) as a function of the EM iterations. The red
dots indicate the	10
iterations for which
the mixture	5
components of the corresponding GMM	0
fits are shown in (c)
through (f). The	-5
yellow discs indicate

x1
(a) Dataset.

EM iteration
(b) Negative log-likelihood.

10


5


0


-5

the means of the Gaussian mixture components.
Figure 11.10(a) shows the final GMM fit.

-10 10	-5	0	5	10


(c) EM initialization.

10


5

-10 10	-5	0	5	10


(d) EM after one iteration.

10


5



0


-5

-10
x1

(e) EM after 10 iterations.

0


-5

-10
x1

(f) EM after 62 iterations.





  We applied the EM algorithm to the two-dimensional dataset shown in Figure 11.1 with K = 3 mixture components. Figure 11.9 illustrates some steps of the EM algorithm and shows the negative log-likelihood as a function of the EM iteration (Figure 11.9(b)). Figure 11.10(a) shows

6

4

2

0

-2
-4
-6	5	0	5
x1

(a) GMM fit after 62 iterations.

6

4

2

0

-2
-4
-6	5	0	5
x1

(b) Dataset colored according to the respon- sibilities of the mixture components.

Figure 11.10 GMM fit and responsibilities when EM converges.
(a) GMM fit when EM converges;
(b) each data point is colored according to the responsibilities of the mixture components.



the corresponding final GMM fit. Figure 11.10(b) visualizes the final re- sponsibilities of the mixture components for the data points. The dataset is colored according to the responsibilities of the mixture components when EM converges. While a single mixture component is clearly responsible for the data on the left, the overlap of the two data clusters on the right could have been generated by two mixture components. It becomes clear that there are data points that cannot be uniquely assigned to a single component (either blue or yellow), such that the responsibilities of these two clusters for those points are around 0.5.


11.4 Latent-Variable Perspective
We can look at the GMM from the perspective of a discrete latent-variable model, i.e., where the latent variable z can attain only a finite set of val- ues. This is in contrast to PCA, where the latent variables were continuous- valued numbers in RM .
  The advantages of the probabilistic perspective are that (i) it will jus- tify some ad hoc decisions we made in the previous sections, (ii) it allows for a concrete interpretation of the responsibilities as posterior probabil- ities, and (iii) the iterative algorithm for updating the model parameters can be derived in a principled manner as the EM algorithm for maximum likelihood parameter estimation in latent-variable models.


11.4.1 Generative Process and Probabilistic Model
To derive the probabilistic model for GMMs, it is useful to think about the generative process, i.e., the process that allows us to generate data, using a probabilistic model.
  We assume a mixture model with K components and that a data point x can be generated by exactly one mixture component. We introduce a binary indicator variable zk  0, 1 with two states (see Section 6.2) that indicates whether the kth mixture component generated that data point

so that

p(x | zk = 1) = N(x | µk, Sk) .	(11.58)

We define z := [z1, . . . , zK]?  RK as a probability vector consisting of K 1 many 0s and exactly one 1. For example, for K = 3, a valid z would be z = [z1, z2, z3]? = [0, 1, 0]?, which would select the second mixture component since z2 = 1.
Remark. Sometimes this kind of probability distribution is called "multi- noulli", a generalization of the Bernoulli distribution to more than two values (Murphy, 2012).	?

one-hot encoding
1-of-K

k=1 zk
encoding (also: 1-of-K representation).

= 1. Therefore, z is a one-hot

representation		Thus far, we assumed that the indicator variables zk are known. How- ever, in practice, this is not the case, and we place a prior distribution


p(z) = p = [p1, . . . , pK]? ,

on the latent variable z. Then the kth entry


K
pk = 1 ,	(11.59)
k=1





Figure 11.11 Graphical model for a GMM with a single data point.
p













ancestral sampling

pk = p(zk = 1)	(11.60)
of this probability vector describes the probability that the kth mixture component generated data point x.
Remark (Sampling from a GMM). The construction of this latent-variable model (see the corresponding graphical model in Figure 11.11) lends it- self to a very simple sampling procedure (generative process) to generate data:
1. Sample z(i) ~ p(z).
2. Sample x(i) ~ p(x | z(i) = 1).
In the first step, we select a mixture component i (via the one-hot encod- ing z) at random according to p(z) = p; in the second step we draw a sample from the corresponding mixture component. When we discard the samples of the latent variable so that we are left with the x(i), we have valid samples from the GMM. This kind of sampling, where samples of random variables depend on samples from the variable's parents in the graphical model, is called ancestral sampling.	?
  Generally, a probabilistic model is defined by the joint distribution of the data and the latent variables (see Section 8.4). With the prior p(z) defined in (11.59) and (11.60) and the conditional p(x z) from (11.58), we obtain all K components of this joint distribution via
p(x, zk = 1) = p(x | zk = 1)p(zk = 1) = pkN(x | µk, Sk)	(11.61)

for k = 1, . . . , K, so that
?? p(x, z1 = 1) ??

?? p1N(x | µ1, S1) ??

p(x, z) =

?p(x, zK = 1)?

?pKN(x | µK, SK)?

,	(11.62)




11.4.2 Likelihood
To obtain the likelihood p(x ?) in a latent-variable model, we need to marginalize out the latent variables (see Section 8.4.3). In our case, this can be done by summing out all latent variables from the joint p(x, z) in (11.62) so that
p(x | ?) = L p(x | ?, z)p(z | ?) ,	? := {µk, Sk, pk : k = 1, . . . , K} .
(11.63)
We now explicitly condition on the parameters ? of the probabilistic model, which we previously omitted. In (11.63), we sum over all K possible one- hot encodings of z, which is denoted by z . Since there is only a single nonzero single entry in each z there are only K possible configurations/ settings of z. For example, if K = 3, then z can have the configurations
?1? ?0? ?0?
?0? , ?1? , ?0? .	(11.64)
Summing over all possible configurations of z in (11.63) is equivalent to looking at the nonzero entry of the z-vector and writing
p(x | ?) = L p(x | ?, z)p(z | ?)	(11.65a)

K
=	p(x | ?, zk = 1)p(zk = 1 | ?)	(11.65b)
k=1
so that the desired marginal distribution is given as
K
p(x | ?) (11.65b) L p(x | ?, z  = 1)p(z  = 1|?)	(11.66a)
=	k	k
k=1
K
=	pkN x | µk, Sk  ,	(11.66b)
k=1
which we identify as the GMM model from (11.3). Given a dataset	, we immediately obtain the likelihood
N	N	K

p(X | ?) = IT p(x


| ?) (11.66b) IT L p N(x



| µ , S ) ,	(11.67)

Figure 11.12	p
Graphical model for a GMM with N data points.









which is exactly the GMM likelihood from (11.9). Therefore, the latent- variable model with latent indicators zk is an equivalent way of thinking about a Gaussian mixture model.

11.4.3 Posterior Distribution
Let us have a brief look at the posterior distribution on the latent variable
z. According to Bayes' theorem, the posterior of the kth component having generated data point x


p(zk

= 1 x) = p(zk = 1)p(x | zk = 1) ,	(11.68)
p(x)

where the marginal p(x) is given in (11.66b). This yields the posterior distribution for the kth indicator variable zk


p(z

= 1 | x) =   p(zk = 1)p(x | zk = 1)

		

=   pkN(x | µk, Sk) )
	


which we identify as the responsibility of the kth mixture component for data point x. Note that we omitted the explicit conditioning on the GMM parameters pk, µk, Sk where k = 1, . . . , K.

11.4.4 Extension to a Full Dataset
Thus far, we have only discussed the case where the dataset consists only of a single data point x. However, the concepts of the prior and posterior can be directly extended to the case of N data points	:= x1, . . . , xN . In the probabilistic interpretation of the GMM, every data point xn pos-
sesses its own latent variable
zn = [zn1, . . . , znK]? ? RK .	(11.70)
Previously (when we only considered a single data point x), we omitted the index n, but now this becomes important.

  We share the same prior distribution p across all latent variables zn. The corresponding graphical model is shown in Figure 11.12, where we use the plate notation.
  The conditional distribution p(x1, . . . , xN z1, . . . , zN ) factorizes over the data points and is given as

N
p(x1, . . . , xN  z1, . . . , zN ) =	p(xn  zn) .	(11.71)
n=1

To obtain the posterior distribution p(znk = 1 xn), we follow the same reasoning as in Section 11.4.3 and apply Bayes' theorem to obtain



p(z

= 1 | x

) =	p(xn | znk = 1)p(znk = 1)

(11.72a)

=   pkN(xn | µk, Sk)






= r	.	(11.72b)




This means that p(zk = 1 xn) is the (posterior) probability that the kth mixture component generated data point xn and corresponds to the re- sponsibility rnk we introduced in (11.17). Now the responsibilities also have not only an intuitive but also a mathematically justified interpreta- tion as posterior probabilities.


11.4.5 EM Algorithm Revisited
The EM algorithm that we introduced as an iterative scheme for maximum likelihood estimation can be derived in a principled way from the latent- variable perspective. Given a current setting ?(t) of model parameters, the E-step calculates the expected log-likelihood


Q(? | ?

(t)

) = Ez | x,?(t) [log p(x, z | ?)]	(11.73a)
= - log p(x, z | ?)p(z | x, ?(t))dz ,	(11.73b)


where the expectation of log p(x, z ?) is taken with respect to the poste- rior p(z x, ?(t)) of the latent variables. The M-step selects an updated set of model parameters ?(t+1) by maximizing (11.73b).
Although an EM iteration does increase the log-likelihood, there are
no guarantees that EM converges to the maximum likelihood solution. It is possible that the EM algorithm converges to a local maximum of the log-likelihood. Different initializations of the parameters ? could be used in multiple EM runs to reduce the risk of ending up in a bad local optimum. We do not go into further details here, but refer to the excellent expositions by Rogers and Girolami (2016) and Bishop (2006).

11.5 Further Reading
The GMM can be considered a generative model in the sense that it is straightforward to generate new data using ancestral sampling (Bishop, 2006). For given GMM parameters pk, µk, Sk, k = 1, . . . , K, we sample an index k from the probability vector [p1, . . . , pK]? and then sample a data point x	µk, Sk . If we repeat this N times, we obtain a dataset that has been generated by a GMM. Figure 11.1 was generated using this procedure.
  Throughout this chapter, we assumed that the number of components K is known. In practice, this is often not the case. However, we could use nested cross-validation, as discussed in Section 8.6.1, to find good models. Gaussian mixture models are closely related to the K-means clustering algorithm. K-means also uses the EM algorithm to assign data points to clusters. If we treat the means in the GMM as cluster centers and ignore the covariances (or set them to I), we arrive at K-means. As also nicely described by MacKay (2003), K-means makes a "hard" assignment of data points to cluster centers µk, whereas a GMM makes a "soft" assignment
via the responsibilities.
  We only touched upon the latent-variable perspective of GMMs and the EM algorithm. Note that EM can be used for parameter learning in general latent-variable models, e.g., nonlinear state-space models (Ghahramani and Roweis, 1999; Roweis and Ghahramani, 1999) and for reinforcement learning as discussed by Barber (2012). Therefore, the latent-variable per- spective of a GMM is useful to derive the corresponding EM algorithm in a principled way (Bishop, 2006; Barber, 2012; Murphy, 2012).
  We only discussed maximum likelihood estimation (via the EM algo- rithm) for finding GMM parameters. The standard criticisms of maximum likelihood also apply here:
As in linear regression, maximum likelihood can suffer from severe overfitting. In the GMM case, this happens when the mean of a mix- ture component is identical to a data point and the covariance tends to
0. Then, the likelihood approaches infinity. Bishop (2006) and Barber (2012) discuss this issue in detail.
We only obtain a point estimate of the parameters pk, µk, Sk for k = 1, . . . , K, which does not give any indication of uncertainty in the pa- rameter values. A Bayesian approach would place a prior on the param- eters, which can be used to obtain a posterior distribution on the param- eters. This posterior allows us to compute the model evidence (marginal likelihood), which can be used for model comparison, which gives us a principled way to determine the number of mixture components. Un- fortunately, closed-form inference is not possible in this setting because there is no conjugate prior for this model. However, approximations, such as variational inference, can be used to obtain an approximate posterior (Bishop, 2006).

11.5 Further Reading	369


0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00










-4	-2	0	2	4	6	8




Figure 11.13 Histogram (orange bars) and kernel density estimation (blue line). The kernel density estimator produces a smooth estimate of the underlying density, whereas the histogram is an unsmoothed count measure of how many data points (black) fall into a

In this chapter, we discussed mixture models for density estimation.
There is a plethora of density estimation techniques available. In practice,

single bin.

we often use histograms and kernel density estimation.	histogram
  Histograms provide a nonparametric way to represent continuous den- sities and have been proposed by Pearson (1895). A histogram is con- structed by "binning" the data space and count, how many data points fall into each bin. Then a bar is drawn at the center of each bin, and the height of the bar is proportional to the number of data points within that bin. The bin size is a critical hyperparameter, and a bad choice can lead to overfit- ting and underfitting. Cross-validation, as discussed in Section 8.2.4, can
be used to determine a good bin size.	kernel density

  Kernel density estimation, independently proposed by Rosenblatt (1956) and Parzen (1962), is a nonparametric way for density estimation. Given N i.i.d. samples, the kernel density estimator represents the underlying distribution as

estimation


p(x) =

1
k
n=1

x - xn


h


,	(11.74)

where k is a kernel function, i.e., a nonnegative function that integrates to 1 and h > 0 is a smoothing/bandwidth parameter, which plays a similar role as the bin size in histograms. Note that we place a kernel on every single data point xn in the dataset. Commonly used kernel functions are the uniform distribution and the Gaussian distribution. Kernel density esti- mates are closely related to histograms, but by choosing a suitable kernel, we can guarantee smoothness of the density estimate. Figure 11.13 illus- trates the difference between a histogram and a kernel density estimator (with a Gaussian-shaped kernel) for a given dataset of 250 data points.




12


Classification with Support Vector Machines













An example of structure is if the outcomes were ordered, like in the case of small, medium, and large t-shirts.
binary classification




Input example xn may also be referred to as inputs, data points, features, or instances.
class
For probabilistic models, it is mathematically convenient to use 0, 1 as a binary representation; see the remark after Example 6.12.

In many situations, we want our machine learning algorithm to predict one of a number of (discrete) outcomes. For example, an email client sorts mail into personal mail and junk mail, which has two outcomes. Another example is a telescope that identifies whether an object in the night sky is a galaxy, star, or planet. There are usually a small number of outcomes, and more importantly there is usually no additional structure on these outcomes. In this chapter, we consider predictors that output binary val- ues, i.e., there are only two possible outcomes. This machine learning task is called binary classification. This is in contrast to Chapter 9, where we considered a prediction problem with continuous-valued outputs.
  For binary classification, the set of possible values that the label/output can attain is binary, and for this chapter we denote them by +1, 1 . In other words, we consider predictors of the form
f : RD ? {+1, -1} .	(12.1)
Recall from Chapter 8 that we represent each example (data point) xn as a feature vector of D real numbers. The labels are often referred to as the positive and negative classes, respectively. One should be careful not to infer intuitive attributes of positiveness of the +1 class. For example, in a cancer detection task, a patient with cancer is often labeled +1. In principle, any two distinct values can be used, e.g., True, False , 0, 1 or red, blue . The problem of binary classification is well studied, and we defer a survey of other approaches to Section 12.6.
  We present an approach known as the support vector machine (SVM), which solves the binary classification task. As in regression, we have a su- pervised learning task, where we have a set of examples xn RD along with their corresponding (binary) labels yn  +1, 1 . Given a train- ing data set consisting of example-label pairs (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) , we would like to estimate parameters of the model that will give the smallest classification error. Similar to Chapter 9, we consider a linear model, and hide away the nonlinearity in a transformation ? of the examples (9.13). We will revisit ? in Section 12.4.
  The SVM provides state-of-the-art results in many applications, with sound theoretical guarantees (Steinwart and Christmann, 2008). There are two main reasons why we chose to illustrate binary classification using
370
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.

Classification with Support Vector Machines	371
Figure 12.1 Example 2D data, illustrating the intuition of data where we can find a linear classifier that separates orange crosses from blue discs.
x(1)

SVMs. First, the SVM allows for a geometric way to think about supervised machine learning. While in Chapter 9 we considered the machine learning problem in terms of probabilistic models and attacked it using maximum likelihood estimation and Bayesian inference, here we will consider an alternative approach where we reason geometrically about the machine learning task. It relies heavily on concepts, such as inner products and projections, which we discussed in Chapter 3. The second reason why we find SVMs instructive is that in contrast to Chapter 9, the optimization problem for SVM does not admit an analytic solution so that we need to resort to a variety of optimization tools introduced in Chapter 7.
  The SVM view of machine learning is subtly different from the max- imum likelihood view of Chapter 9. The maximum likelihood view pro- poses a model based on a probabilistic view of the data distribution, from which an optimization problem is derived. In contrast, the SVM view starts by designing a particular function that is to be optimized during training, based on geometric intuitions. We have seen something similar already in Chapter 10, where we derived PCA from geometric principles. In the SVM case, we start by designing a loss function that is to be minimized on training data, following the principles of empirical risk minimization (Section 8.2).
  Let us derive the optimization problem corresponding to training an SVM on example-label pairs. Intuitively, we imagine binary classification data, which can be separated by a hyperplane as illustrated in Figure 12.1. Here, every example xn (a vector of dimension 2) is a two-dimensional
location (x(1) and x(2)), and the corresponding binary label yn is one of
n	n
two different symbols (orange cross or blue disc). "Hyperplane" is a word that is commonly used in machine learning, and we encountered hyper- planes already in Section 2.8. A hyperplane is an affine subspace of di- mension D 1 (if the corresponding vector space is of dimension D). The examples consist of two classes (there are two possible labels) that have features (the components of the vector representing the example) arranged in such a way as to allow us to separate/classify them by draw- ing a straight line.

  In the following, we formalize the idea of finding a linear separator of the two classes. We introduce the idea of the margin and then extend linear separators to allow for examples to fall on the "wrong" side, incur- ring a classification error. We present two equivalent ways of formalizing the SVM: the geometric view (Section 12.2.4) and the loss function view (Section 12.2.5). We derive the dual version of the SVM using Lagrange multipliers (Section 7.2). The dual SVM allows us to observe a third way of formalizing the SVM: in terms of the convex hulls of the examples of each class (Section 12.3.2). We conclude by briefly describing kernels and how to numerically solve the nonlinear kernel-SVM optimization problem.

12.1 Separating Hyperplanes
Given two examples represented as vectors xi and xj, one way to compute the similarity between them is using an inner product xi, xj . Recall from Section 3.2 that inner products are closely related to the angle between two vectors. The value of the inner product between two vectors depends on the length (norm) of each vector. Furthermore, inner products allow us to rigorously define geometric concepts such as orthogonality and pro- jections.
  The main idea behind many classification algorithms is to represent data in RD and then partition this space, ideally in a way that examples with the same label (and no other examples) are in the same partition. In the case of binary classification, the space would be divided into two parts corresponding to the positive and negative classes, respectively. We consider a particularly convenient partition, which is to (linearly) split the space into two halves using a hyperplane. Let example x RD be an element of the data space. Consider a function
f : RD ? R	(12.2a)
x 1? f (x) := ?w, x? + b ,	(12.2b)
parametrized by w RD and b R. Recall from Section 2.8 that hy- perplanes are affine subspaces. Therefore, we define the hyperplane that separates the two classes in our binary classification problem as
x ? RD : f (x) = 0  .	(12.3)
  An illustration of the hyperplane is shown in Figure 12.2, where the vector w is a vector normal to the hyperplane and b the intercept. We can derive that w is a normal vector to the hyperplane in (12.3) by choosing any two examples xa and xb on the hyperplane and showing that the vector between them is orthogonal to w. In the form of an equation,
f (xa) - f (xb) = ?w, xa? + b - (?w, xb? + b)	(12.4a)
= ?w, xa - xb? ,	(12.4b)

12.1 Separating Hyperplanes	373

	



Figure 12.2 Equation of a separating hyperplane (12.3).
(a) The standard way of representing the equation in 3D.
(b) For ease of drawing, we look at the hyperplane edge
on.

(a) Separating hyperplane in 3D
(b) 
Projection of the setting in (a) onto a plane



where the second line is obtained by the linearity of the inner product (Section 3.2). Since we have chosen xa and xb to be on the hyperplane, this implies that f (xa) = 0 and f (xb) = 0 and hence w, xa  xb  = 0.
Recall that two vectors are orthogonal when their inner product is zero.  w is orthogonal to

Therefore, we obtain that w is orthogonal to any vector on the hyperplane.
Remark. Recall from Chapter 2 that we can think of vectors in different ways. In this chapter, we think of the parameter vector w as an arrow indicating a direction, i.e., we consider w to be a geometric vector. In contrast, we think of the example vector x as a data point (as indicated by its coordinates), i.e., we consider x to be the coordinates of a vector with respect to the standard basis.	?
  When presented with a test example, we classify the example as pos- itive or negative depending on the side of the hyperplane on which it occurs. Note that (12.3) not only defines a hyperplane; it additionally de- fines a direction. In other words, it defines the positive and negative side of the hyperplane. Therefore, to classify a test example xtest, we calcu- late the value of the function f (xtest) and classify the example as +1 if f (xtest) ? 0 and 1 otherwise. Thinking geometrically, the positive ex- amples lie "above" the hyperplane and the negative examples "below" the hyperplane.
  When training the classifier, we want to ensure that the examples with positive labels are on the positive side of the hyperplane, i.e.,
                ?w, xn? + b ? 0	when	yn = +1	(12.5) and the examples with negative labels are on the negative side, i.e.,
?w, xn? + b < 0	when	yn = -1 .	(12.6)
Refer to Figure 12.2 for a geometric intuition of positive and negative examples. These two conditions are often presented in a single equation
yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 0 .	(12.7)
Equation (12.7) is equivalent to (12.5) and (12.6) when we multiply both sides of (12.5) and (12.6) with yn = 1 and yn = -1, respectively.

any vector on the hyperplane.



Figure 12.3 Possible separating hyperplanes. There are many linear classifiers (green lines) that separate orange crosses from blue discs.














x(1)
















A classifier with large margin turns out to generalize well (Steinwart and Christmann, 2008).




margin
There could be two or more closest examples to a hyperplane.
12.2 
Primal Support Vector Machine
Based on the concept of distances from points to a hyperplane, we now are in a position to discuss the support vector machine. For a dataset (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) that is linearly separable, we have infinitely many candidate hyperplanes (refer to Figure 12.3), and therefore classifiers, that solve our classification problem without any (training) errors. To find a unique solution, one idea is to choose the separating hyperplane that maximizes the margin between the positive and negative examples. In other words, we want the positive and negative examples to be separated by a large margin (Section 12.2.1). In the following, we compute the dis- tance between an example and a hyperplane to derive the margin. Recall that the closest point on the hyperplane to a given point (example xn) is obtained by the orthogonal projection (Section 3.8).


12.2.1 Concept of the Margin
The concept of the margin is intuitively simple: It is the distance of the separating hyperplane to the closest examples in the dataset, assuming that the dataset is linearly separable. However, when trying to formalize this distance, there is a technical wrinkle that may be confusing. The tech- nical wrinkle is that we need to define a scale at which to measure the distance. A potential scale is to consider the scale of the data, i.e., the raw values of xn. There are problems with this, as we could change the units of measurement of xn and change the values in xn, and, hence, change the distance to the hyperplane. As we will see shortly, we define the scale based on the equation of the hyperplane (12.3) itself.
  Consider a hyperplane w, x + b, and an example xa as illustrated in Figure 12.4. Without loss of generality, we can consider the example xa to be on the positive side of the hyperplane, i.e., w, xa + b > 0. We would like to compute the distance r > 0 of xa from the hyperplane. We do so by considering the orthogonal projection (Section 3.8) of xa onto the hyperplane, which we denote by x'a. Since w is orthogonal to the


Figure 12.4 Vector addition to express
w	distance to
hyperplane:
xa = x'a + r  w .
?w?




hyperplane, we know that the distance r is just a scaling of this vector w. If the length of w is known, then we can use this scaling factor r factor to work out the absolute distance between xa and x'a. For convenience, we choose to use a vector of unit length (its norm is 1) and obtain this
by dividing w by its norm,  w . Using vector addition (Section 2.4), we

obtain

?w?

x  = x' + r w  .	(12.8)
?w?
Another way of thinking about r is that it is the coordinate of xa in the subspace spanned by w/ w . We have now expressed the distance of xa from the hyperplane as r, and if we choose xa to be the point closest to the hyperplane, this distance r is the margin.
  Recall that we would like the positive examples to be further than r from the hyperplane, and the negative examples to be further than dis- tance r (in the negative direction) from the hyperplane. Analogously to the combination of (12.5) and (12.6) into (12.7), we formulate this ob- jective as
yn(?w, xn? + b) ? r .	(12.9)
In other words, we combine the requirements that examples are at least r away from the hyperplane (in the positive and negative direction) into one single inequality.
Since we are interested only in the direction, we add an assumption to
our model that the parameter vector w is ofvunit length, i.e., ?w? = 1,
where we use the Euclidean norm ?w? =	w?w (Section 3.1). This	We will see other

assumption also allows a more intuitive interpretation of the distance r
(12.8) since it is the scaling factor of a vector of length 1.
Remark. A reader familiar with other presentations of the margin would notice that our definition of w = 1 is different from the standard presentation if the SVM was the one provided by Scho¨lkopf and Smola (2002), for example. In Section 12.2.3, we will show the equivalence of both approaches.	?
Collecting the three requirements into a single constrained optimization

choices of inner products (Section 3.2) in
Section 12.4.


Figure 12.5 Derivation of the margin: r =  1  .
?w?








problem, we obtain the objective

max
w,b,r

m..a..r,,g..in



(12.10)

subject to	yn(?w, xn? + b) ? r , ?w? = 1 ,	r > 0 ,
..	data..fi,,tting	.. n..orma..l,,izatio..n
which says that we want to maximize the margin r while ensuring that the data lies on the correct side of the hyperplane.
Remark. The concept of the margin turns out to be highly pervasive in ma- chine learning. It was used by Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis to show that when the margin is large, the "complexity" of the function class is low, and hence learning is possible (Vapnik, 2000). It turns out that the concept is useful for various different approaches for theoret- ically analyzing generalization error (Steinwart and Christmann, 2008; Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014).	?












Recall that we currently consider linearly separable data.
12.2.2 
Traditional Derivation of the Margin
In the previous section, we derived (12.10) by making the observation that we are only interested in the direction of w and not its length, leading to the assumption that w = 1. In this section, we derive the margin max- imization problem by making a different assumption. Instead of choosing that the parameter vector is normalized, we choose a scale for the data. We choose this scale such that the value of the predictor w, x + b is 1 at the closest example. Let us also denote the example in the dataset that is closest to the hyperplane by xa.
  Figure 12.5 is identical to Figure 12.4, except that now we rescaled the axes, such that the example xa lies exactly on the margin, i.e., ?w, xa? +

b = 1. Since x'a is the orthogonal projection of xa onto the hyperplane, it must by definition lie on the hyperplane, i.e.,
?w, x'a? + b = 0 .	(12.11)

By substituting (12.8) into (12.11), we obtain

 w, xa

 w
- r ?w?

  + b = 0 .	(12.12)

Exploiting the bilinearity of the inner product (see Section 3.2), we get
?w, x ? + b - r ?w, w? = 0 .	(12.13)
?w?
Observe that the first term is 1 by our assumption of scale, i.e., ?w, xa? + b = 1. From (3.16) in Section 3.1, we know that ?w, w? = ?w?2. Hence, the second term reduces to r?w?. Using these simplifications, we obtain
1

r =
?w?

.	(12.14)

This means we derived the distance r in terms of the normal vector w
of the hyperplane. At first glance, this equation is counterintuitive as we	We can also think of

seem to have derived the distance from the hyperplane in terms of the length of the vector w, but we do not yet know this vector. One way to think about it is to consider the distance r to be a temporary variable that we only use for this derivation. Therefore, for the rest of this section we will denote the distance to the hyperplane by  1  . In Section 12.2.3,
we will see that the choice that the margin equals?w?is equivalent to our

the distance as the projection error that incurs when projecting xa onto the hyperplane.

previous assumption of w = 1 in Section 12.2.1.
  Similar to the argument to obtain (12.9), we want the positive and negative examples to be at least 1 away from the hyperplane, which yields the condition
yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 1 .	(12.15)
Combining the margin maximization with the fact that examples need to be on the correct side of the hyperplane (based on their labels) gives us
1

max
w,b



?w?

(12.16)

subject to yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 1	for all	n = 1, . . . , N.	(12.17)
Instead of maximizing the reciprocal of the norm as in (12.16), we often
minimize the squared norm. We also often include a constant 1 that does	The squared norm

not affect the optimal w, b but yields a tidier form when we compute the gradient. Then, our objective becomes

results in a convex quadratic programming

min
w,b

1
2 ?w?	(12.18)

problem for the SVM (Section 12.5).

subject to yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 1	for all	n = 1, . . . , N .	(12.19)
Equation (12.18) is known as the hard margin SVM. The reason for the	hard margin SVM
expression "hard" is because the formulation does not allow for any vi- olations of the margin condition. We will see in Section 12.2.4 that this

"hard" condition can be relaxed to accommodate violations if the data is not linearly separable.

12.2.3 Why We Can Set the Margin to 1
In Section 12.2.1, we argued that we would like to maximize some value r, which represents the distance of the closest example to the hyperplane. In Section 12.2.2, we scaled the data such that the closest example is of distance 1 to the hyperplane. In this section, we relate the two derivations, and show that they are equivalent.
Theorem 12.1. Maximizing the margin r, where we consider normalized weights as in (12.10),

max
w,b,r

m..a..r,,g..in



(12.20)

subject to	yn(?w, xn? + b) ? r ,	?w? = 1 ,	r > 0 ,
..	data..fi,,tting	..	n..orma..l,,izatio..n
is equivalent to scaling the data, such that the margin is unity:


min
w,b

1	2
2 ?w?		
.. ma..r,,gin ..



(12.21)

subject to	yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 1 .
..	data..fi,,tting	..
Proof Consider (12.20). Since the square is a strictly monotonic trans- formation for non-negative arguments, the maximum stays the same if we consider r2 in the objective. Since w = 1 we can reparametrize the equation with a new weight vector w' that is not normalized by explicitly

using w'
?w'?

. We obtain

max
w',b,r

r2
(  w'	i


(12.22)

subject to	yn

?w'? , xn

+ b	? r,	r > 0 .



Note that r > 0
because we

Equation (12.22) explicitly states that the distance r is positive. Therefore, we can divide the first constraint by r, which yields

assumed linear separability, and hence there is no issue to divide by r.

max	r2
w',b,r

?	w'	b ?
?	?



(12.23)

subject to	y

n ??



?w'? r

, xn

r ??

? 1,	r > 0

.. w..,,'' ..

....b',,' ..

Figure 12.6
(a) Linearly separable and
(b) non-linearly separable data.







x(1)
(a) Linearly separable data, with a large margin


x(1)
(b) Non-linearly separable data




renaming the parameters to w'' and b''. Since w'' =	w'
?w'?r

, rearranging for

r gives

?w''? = 1	w'

1 = 1 · 1 w'

1 = 1 .	(12.24)

1 ?w'? r 1	r  1 ?w'? 1	r
By substituting this result into (12.23), we obtain
1

max
w'',b''



?w''?

(12.25)

subject to	yn (?w'', xn? + b'') ? 1 .

The final step is to observe that maximizing	1
?w''?

2 yields the same solution

as minimizing 1 ?w''?2, which concludes the proof of Theorem 12.1.


12.2.4 Soft Margin SVM: Geometric View
In the case where data is not linearly separable, we may wish to allow some examples to fall within the margin region, or even to be on the wrong side of the hyperplane as illustrated in Figure 12.6.
The model that allows for some classification errors is called the soft  soft margin SVM
margin SVM. In this section, we derive the resulting optimization problem using geometric arguments. In Section 12.2.5, we will derive an equiv- alent optimization problem using the idea of a loss function. Using La- grange multipliers (Section 7.2), we will derive the dual optimization problem of the SVM in Section 12.3. This dual optimization problem al- lows us to observe a third interpretation of the SVM: as a hyperplane that bisects the line between convex hulls corresponding to the positive and negative data examples (Section 12.3.2).
The key geometric idea is to introduce a slack variable ?n corresponding  slack variable
to each example-label pair (xn, yn) that allows a particular example to be within the margin or even on the wrong side of the hyperplane (refer to



Figure 12.7 Soft margin SVM allows examples to be within the margin or on the wrong side of the hyperplane. The slack variable ? measures the distance of a positive example
x+ to the positive
margin hyperplane
?w, x? + b = 1 when x+ is on the wrong side.












Figure 12.7). We subtract the value of ?n from the margin, constraining ?n to be non-negative. To encourage correct classification of the samples, we add ?n to the objective


min
w,b,?


N
w 2 + C	?n
2


(12.26a)





soft margin SVM regularization

n=1
subject to	yn(?w, xn? + b) ? 1 - ?n	(12.26b)
?n ? 0	(12.26c)
for n = 1, . . . , N . In contrast to the optimization problem (12.18) for the hard margin SVM, this one is called the soft margin SVM. The parameter C > 0 trades off the size of the margin and the total amount of slack that we have. This parameter is called the regularization parameter since, as

parameter	we will see in the following section, the margin term in the objective func- tion (12.26a) is a regularization term. The margin term ?w?2 is called

regularizer





There are alternative parametrizations of this regularization, which is
why (12.26a) is also often referred to as the C-SVM.

the regularizer, and in many books on numerical optimization, the reg- ularization parameter is multiplied with this term (Section 8.2.3). This is in contrast to our formulation in this section. Here a large value of C implies low regularization, as we give the slack variables larger weight, hence giving more priority to examples that do not lie on the correct side of the margin.
Remark. In the formulation of the soft margin SVM (12.26a) w is reg- ularized, but b is not regularized. We can see this by observing that the regularization term does not contain b. The unregularized term b com- plicates theoretical analysis (Steinwart and Christmann, 2008, chapter 1) and decreases computational efficiency (Fan et al., 2008).	?

12.2.5 Soft Margin SVM: Loss Function View
Let us consider a different approach for deriving the SVM, following the principle of empirical risk minimization (Section 8.2). For the SVM, we

choose hyperplanes as the hypothesis class, that is
                f (x) = ?w, x? + b.	(12.27) We will see in this section that the margin corresponds to the regulariza-
tion term. The remaining question is, what is the loss function? In con- loss function
trast to Chapter 9, where we consider regression problems (the output of the predictor is a real number), in this chapter, we consider binary classification problems (the output of the predictor is one of two labels
 +1, 1 ). Therefore, the error/loss function for each single example- label pair needs to be appropriate for binary classification. For example, the squared loss that is used for regression (9.10b) is not suitable for bi- nary classification.
Remark. The ideal loss function between binary labels is to count the num- ber of mismatches between the prediction and the label. This means that for a predictor f applied to an example xn, we compare the output f (xn) with the label yn. We define the loss to be zero if they match, and one if they do not match. This is denoted by 1(f (xn) = yn) and is called the
zero-one loss. Unfortunately, the zero-one loss results in a combinatorial	zero-one loss optimization problem for finding the best parameters w, b. Combinatorial optimization problems (in contrast to continuous optimization problems
discussed in Chapter 7) are in general more challenging to solve.	?
  What is the loss function corresponding to the SVM? Consider the error between the output of a predictor f (xn) and the label yn. The loss de- scribes the error that is made on the training data. An equivalent way to
derive (12.26a) is to use the hinge loss	hinge loss
  l(t) = max{0, 1 - t}  where  t = yf (x) = y(?w, x? + b) .  (12.28)
If f (x) is on the correct side (based on the corresponding label y) of the hyperplane, and further than distance 1, this means that t ? 1 and the hinge loss returns a value of zero. If f (x) is on the correct side but too close to the hyperplane (0 < t < 1), the example x is within the margin, and the hinge loss returns a positive value. When the example is on the wrong side of the hyperplane (t < 0), the hinge loss returns an even larger value, which increases linearly. In other words, we pay a penalty once we are closer than the margin to the hyperplane, even if the prediction is correct, and the penalty increases linearly. An alternative way to express the hinge loss is by considering it as two linear pieces
l(t) =	0	if	t ? 1 ,	(12.29)
1 - t	if	t < 1
as illustrated in Figure 12.8. The loss corresponding to the hard margin SVM 12.18 is defined as

l(t) =	0	if	t ? 1
8	if	t < 1


.	(12.30)


Figure 12.8 The
hinge loss is a	4
convex upper bound of zero-one loss.
2


0
2	0	2
t

This loss can be interpreted as never allowing any examples inside the margin.
  For a given training set (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ) , we seek to minimize the total loss, while regularizing the objective with l2-regularization (see Section 8.2.3). Using the hinge loss (12.28) gives us the unconstrained optimization problem


min
w,b


N
w 2 + C	max 0, 1	yn
2

(?w, xn

? + b)} .	(12.31)

r..egu..la,,rize..r

n=1

erro..r,,term	..

regularizer loss term

The first term in (12.31) is called the regularization term or the regularizer
(see Section 8.2.3), and the second term is called the loss term or the error

error term	term. Recall from Section 12.2.4 that the term 1 w 2 arises directly from the margin. In other words, margin maximization can be interpreted as

regularization

regularization.
  In principle, the unconstrained optimization problem in (12.31) can be directly solved with (sub-)gradient descent methods as described in Section 7.1. To see that (12.31) and (12.26a) are equivalent, observe that the hinge loss (12.28) essentially consists of two linear parts, as expressed in (12.29). Consider the hinge loss for a single example-label pair (12.28). We can equivalently replace minimization of the hinge loss over t with a minimization of a slack variable ? with two constraints. In equation form,
min max{0, 1 - t}	(12.32)



is equivalent to



min	?
?,t



(12.33)

subject to	? ? 0 ,	? ? 1 - t .
By substituting this expression into (12.31) and rearranging one of the constraints, we obtain exactly the soft margin SVM (12.26a).
Remark. Let us contrast our choice of the loss function in this section to the loss function for linear regression in Chapter 9. Recall from Section 9.2.1 that for finding maximum likelihood estimators, we usually minimize the

negative log-likelihood. Furthermore, since the likelihood term for linear regression with Gaussian noise is Gaussian, the negative log-likelihood for each example is a squared error function. The squared error function is the loss function that is minimized when looking for the maximum likelihood solution.	?

12.3 Dual Support Vector Machine
The description of the SVM in the previous sections, in terms of the vari- ables w and b, is known as the primal SVM. Recall that we consider inputs x RD with D features. Since w is of the same dimension as x, this means that the number of parameters (the dimension of w) of the opti- mization problem grows linearly with the number of features.
  In the following, we consider an equivalent optimization problem (the so-called dual view), which is independent of the number of features. In- stead, the number of parameters increases with the number of examples in the training set. We saw a similar idea appear in Chapter 10, where we expressed the learning problem in a way that does not scale with the num- ber of features. This is useful for problems where we have more features than the number of examples in the training dataset. The dual SVM also has the additional advantage that it easily allows kernels to be applied, as we shall see at the end of this chapter. The word "dual" appears often in mathematical literature, and in this particular case it refers to convex duality. The following subsections are essentially an application of convex duality, which we discussed in Section 7.2.


12.3.1 Convex Duality via Lagrange Multipliers
Recall the primal soft margin SVM (12.26a). We call the variables w, b,
and ? corresponding to the primal SVM the primal variables. We use an ?	In Chapter 7, we

0 as the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to the constraint (12.26b) that the examples are classified correctly and ?n ? 0 as the Lagrange multi- plier corresponding to the non-negativity constraint of the slack variable; see (12.26c). The Lagrangian is then given by

N

used ? as Lagrange multipliers. In this section, we follow the notation commonly chosen in SVM literature, and use a and ?.

L(w, b, ?, a, ?) = 1 w 2 + C	?
n=1
N

(12.34)

N

- L an(yn(?w, xn? + b) - 1 + ?n)

?n?n  .
n=1

..	constrain..t,,(12.26b)	.. co..nstrain..t,,(12.26..c)

By differentiating the Lagrangian (12.34) with respect to the three primal variables w, b, and ? respectively, we obtain

?L = w?	a
n=1


ynxn


? ,	(12.35)

N
=	anyn
n=1


,	(12.36)

?L


??n

= C - an - ?n .	(12.37)

We now find the maximum of the Lagrangian by setting each of these partial derivatives to zero. By setting (12.35) to zero, we find





representer theorem
The representer theorem is actually a collection of theorems saying that the solution of minimizing empirical risk lies in the subspace (Section 2.4.3) defined by the examples.





support vector


N
w =	anynxn ,	(12.38)
n=1
which is a particular instance of the representer theorem (Kimeldorf and Wahba, 1970). Equation (12.38) states that the optimal weight vector in the primal is a linear combination of the examples xn. Recall from Sec- tion 2.6.1 that this means that the solution of the optimization problem lies in the span of training data. Additionally, the constraint obtained by setting (12.36) to zero implies that the optimal weight vector is an affine combination of the examples. The representer theorem turns out to hold for very general settings of regularized empirical risk minimization (Hof- mann et al., 2008; Argyriou and Dinuzzo, 2014). The theorem has more general versions (Scho¨lkopf et al., 2001), and necessary and sufficient conditions on its existence can be found in Yu et al. (2013).
Remark. The representer theorem (12.38) also provides an explanation of the name "support vector machine." The examples xn, for which the corresponding parameters an = 0, do not contribute to the solution w at all. The other examples, where an > 0, are called support vectors since they "support" the hyperplane.	?
  By substituting the expression for w into the Lagrangian (12.34), we obtain the dual

N
D(?, a, ?) =
2

yiyjaiaj ?xi, xj? - L


yiai

/LN

yjajxj, xi\

i=1 j=1
N	N

i=1
N	N

j=1
N

+ C L ?i - b L yiai + L ai - L ai?i - L ?i?i .

i=1

i=1

i=1

i=1

i=1

(12.39)

Note that there are no longer any terms involving the primal variable w.
By setting (12.36) to zero, we obtain  N	y a = 0. Therefore, the term
n  n
involving b also vanishes. Recall that inner products are symmetric and

bilinear (see Section 3.2). Therefore, the first two terms in (12.39) are over the same objects. These terms (colored blue) can be simplified, and we obtain the Lagrangian

N	N	N	N
D(?, a, ?) = - 1 L L y y a a ?x , x ? + L a + L(C - a - ? )? .

(12.40)
The last term in this equation is a collection of all terms that contain slack variables ?i. By setting (12.37) to zero, we see that the last term in (12.40) is also zero. Furthermore, by using the same equation and recalling that the Lagrange multiplers ?i are non-negative, we conclude that ai ? C. We now obtain the dual optimization problem of the SVM, which is ex- pressed exclusively in terms of the Lagrange multipliers ai. Recall from Lagrangian duality (Definition 7.1) that we maximize the dual problem.
This is equivalent to minimizing the negative dual problem, such that we
end up with the dual SVM	dual SVM

N	N	N
1 L L	L
min	y y a a ?x , x ? -	a

a	2		i j i j	i	j i=1 j=1
N

i
i=1


(12.41)

subject to

yiai = 0
i=1

0 ? ai ? C	for all	i = 1, . . . , N .
The equality constraint in (12.41) is obtained from setting (12.36) to zero. The inequality constraint ai ? 0 is the condition imposed on La- grange multipliers of inequality constraints (Section 7.2). The inequality constraint ai ? C is discussed in the previous paragraph.
  The set of inequality constraints in the SVM are called "box constraints" because they limit the vector a = [a1, , aN ]? RN of Lagrange mul- tipliers to be inside the box defined by 0 and C on each axis. These axis-aligned boxes are particularly efficient to implement in numerical
solvers (Dosta´l, 2009, chapter 5).	It turns out that

  Once we obtain the dual parameters a, we can recover the primal pa- rameters w by using the representer theorem (12.38). Let us call the op- timal primal parameter w*. However, there remains the question on how to obtain the parameter b*. Consider an example xn that lies exactly on the margin's boundary, i.e., ?w*, xn? + b = yn. Recall that yn is either +1 or -1. Therefore, the only unknown is b, which can be computed by
                  b* = yn - ?w*, xn? .	(12.42)
Remark. In principle, there may be no examples that lie exactly on the margin. In this case, we should compute yn w*, xn for all support vectors and take the median value of this absolute value difference to be

examples that lie exactly on the margin are examples whose dual parameters lie strictly inside the box constraints,
0 < ai < C. This is derived using the Karush Kuhn Tucker conditions, for example in Scho¨lkopf and Smola (2002).

Figure 12.9 Convex hulls. (a) Convex hull of points, some of which lie within the boundary;
(b) convex hulls around positive and negative examples.




(a) Convex hull.



(b) Convex hulls around positive (blue) and negative (orange) examples. The distance be- tween the two convex sets is the length of the difference vector c - d.



the value of b*. A derivation of this can be found in http://fouryears. eu/2012/06/07/the-svm-bias-term-conspiracy/.	?

12.3.2 Dual SVM: Convex Hull View
Another approach to obtain the dual SVM is to consider an alternative geometric argument. Consider the set of examples xn with the same label. We would like to build a convex set that contains all the examples such that it is the smallest possible set. This is called the convex hull and is illustrated in Figure 12.9.
  Let us first build some intuition about a convex combination of points. Consider two points x1 and x2 and corresponding non-negative weights a1, a2 ? 0 such that a1+a2 = 1. The equation a1x1+a2x2 describes each point on a line between x1 and x2. Consider what happens when we add
a third point x3 along with a weight a3 ? 0 such that	a	= 1.
3
n


convex hull

The convex combination of these three points x1, x2, x3 spans a two- dimensional area. The convex hull of this area is the triangle formed by the edges corresponding to each pair of of points. As we add more points, and the number of points becomes greater than the number of dimen- sions, some of the points will be inside the convex hull, as we can see in Figure 12.9(a).
  In general, building a convex convex hull can be done by introducing non-negative weights an ? 0 corresponding to each example xn. Then the convex hull can be described as the set


conv (X) =


N


n=1

anxn)


with

nL=1


an = 1	and	an ? 0, (12.43)

for all n = 1, . . . , N . If the two clouds of points corresponding to the positive and negative classes are separated, then the convex hulls do not overlap. Given the training data (x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN ), we form two con- vex hulls, corresponding to the positive and negative classes respectively. We pick a point c, which is in the convex hull of the set of positive exam- ples, and is closest to the negative class distribution. Similarly, we pick a point d in the convex hull of the set of negative examples and is closest to the positive class distribution; see Figure 12.9(b). We define a difference vector between d and c as
w := c - d .	(12.44)
Picking the points c and d as in the preceding cases, and requiring them to be closest to each other is equivalent to minimizing the length/norm of w, so that we end up with the corresponding optimization problem
arg min ?w? = arg min 1 ?w?2 .	(12.45)

Since c must be in the positive convex hull, it can be expressed as a convex combination of the positive examples, i.e., for non-negative coefficients
+
n

c =
n:yn=+1

a+xn .	(12.46)

In (12.46), we use the notation n : yn = +1 to indicate the set of indices n for which yn = +1. Similarly, for the examples with negative labels, we obtain

d =
n:yn=-1

an-xn .	(12.47)

By substituting (12.44), (12.46), and (12.47) into (12.45), we obtain the objective

1
min
a

a+xn -

L	an-xn1


.	(12.48)

2 1n:yn=+1	n:yn=-1	1
  Let a be the set of all coefficients, i.e., the concatenation of a+ and a-. Recall that we require that for each convex hull that their coefficients sum to one,

n:yLn=+1

+
n
n:yn=-1

an- = 1 .	(12.49)

This implies the constraint

N
ynan = 0 .	(12.50)
n=1

This result can be seen by multiplying out the individual classes

L ynan =	L

(+1)a+ +	L

(-1)an-


(12.51a)

n=1

n:yn=+1

n:yn=-1

=
n:yn=+1

+
n
n:yn=-1

an- = 1 - 1 = 0 .	(12.51b)








reduced hull
































kernel

The inputs	of the kernel function can be very general and are not necessarily restricted to RD.

The objective function (12.48) and the constraint (12.50), along with the assumption that a ? 0, give us a constrained (convex) optimization prob- lem. This optimization problem can be shown to be the same as that of the dual hard margin SVM (Bennett and Bredensteiner, 2000a).
Remark. To obtain the soft margin dual, we consider the reduced hull. The reduced hull is similar to the convex hull but has an upper bound to the size of the coefficients a. The maximum possible value of the elements of a restricts the size that the convex hull can take. In other words, the bound on a shrinks the convex hull to a smaller volume (Bennett and Bredensteiner, 2000b).	?

12.4 Kernels
Consider the formulation of the dual SVM (12.41). Notice that the in- ner product in the objective occurs only between examples xi and xj. There are no inner products between the examples and the parameters. Therefore, if we consider a set of features ?(xi) to represent xi, the only change in the dual SVM will be to replace the inner product. This mod- ularity, where the choice of the classification method (the SVM) and the choice of the feature representation ?(x) can be considered separately, provides flexibility for us to explore the two problems independently. In this section, we discuss the representation ?(x) and briefly introduce the idea of kernels, but do not go into the technical details.
  Since ?(x) could be a non-linear function, we can use the SVM (which assumes a linear classifier) to construct classifiers that are nonlinear in the examples xn. This provides a second avenue, in addition to the soft margin, for users to deal with a dataset that is not linearly separable. It turns out that there are many algorithms and statistical methods that have this property that we observed in the dual SVM: the only inner products are those that occur between examples. Instead of explicitly defining a non-linear feature map ?( ) and computing the resulting inner product between examples xi and xj, we define a similarity function k(xi, xj) be- tween xi and xj. For a certain class of similarity functions, called kernels, the similarity function implicitly defines a non-linear feature map ?(·). Kernels are by definition functions k : X × X ? R for which there exists a Hilbert space H and ? : X ? H a feature map such that
k(xi, xj) = ??(xi), ?(xj)?H .	(12.52)

12.4 Kernels	389

Figure 12.10 SVM with different kernels. Note that while the decision boundary is nonlinear, the underlying problem being solved is for a linear separating hyperplane (albeit with a nonlinear kernel).



First feature
(a) SVM with linear kernel














First feature
(c) SVM with polynomial (degree 2) kernel



First feature
(b) SVM with RBF kernel

First feature
(d) SVM with polynomial (degree 3) kernel



There is a unique reproducing kernel Hilbert space associated with every kernel k (Aronszajn, 1950; Berlinet and Thomas-Agnan, 2004). In this
unique association, ?(x) = k(·, x) is called the canonical feature map.	canonical feature
The generalization from an inner product to a kernel function (12.52) is	map
known as the kernel trick (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002; Shawe-Taylor and  kernel trick
Cristianini, 2004), as it hides away the explicit non-linear feature map.
The matrix K  RN×N , resulting from the inner products or the appli-
cation of k( , ) to a dataset, is called the Gram matrix, and is often just Gram matrix referred to as the kernel matrix. Kernels must be symmetric and positive kernel matrix semidefinite functions so that every kernel matrix K is symmetric and
positive semidefinite (Section 3.2.3):
                     ?z ? RN : z?Kz ? 0 .	(12.53) Some popular examples of kernels for multivariate real-valued data xi
RD are the polynomial kernel, the Gaussian radial basis function kernel, and the rational quadratic kernel (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002; Rasmussen






























The choice of kernel, as well as the parameters of the kernel, is often chosen using nested cross-validation (Section 8.6.1).

and Williams, 2006). Figure 12.10 illustrates the effect of different kernels on separating hyperplanes on an example dataset. Note that we are still solving for hyperplanes, that is, the hypothesis class of functions are still linear. The non-linear surfaces are due to the kernel function.
Remark. Unfortunately for the fledgling machine learner, there are mul- tiple meanings of the word "kernel." In this chapter, the word "kernel" comes from the idea of the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) (Aron- szajn, 1950; Saitoh, 1988). We have discussed the idea of the kernel in lin- ear algebra (Section 2.7.3), where the kernel is another word for the null space. The third common use of the word "kernel" in machine learning is the smoothing kernel in kernel density estimation (Section 11.5).	?
  Since the explicit representation ?(x) is mathematically equivalent to the kernel representation k(xi, xj), a practitioner will often design the kernel function such that it can be computed more efficiently than the inner product between explicit feature maps. For example, consider the polynomial kernel (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002), where the number of terms in the explicit expansion grows very quickly (even for polynomials of low degree) when the input dimension is large. The kernel function only requires one multiplication per input dimension, which can provide significant computational savings. Another example is the Gaussian ra- dial basis function kernel (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002; Rasmussen and Williams, 2006), where the corresponding feature space is infinite dimen- sional. In this case, we cannot explicitly represent the feature space but can still compute similarities between a pair of examples using the kernel. Another useful aspect of the kernel trick is that there is no need for the original data to be already represented as multivariate real-valued data. Note that the inner product is defined on the output of the function ?( ), but does not restrict the input to real numbers. Hence, the function ?( ) and the kernel function k( , ) can be defined on any object, e.g., sets, sequences, strings, graphs, and distributions (Ben-Hur et al., 2008;
Ga¨rtner, 2008; Shi et al., 2009; Sriperumbudur et al., 2010; Vishwanathan et al., 2010).


12.5 Numerical Solution
We conclude our discussion of SVMs by looking at how to express the problems derived in this chapter in terms of the concepts presented in Chapter 7. We consider two different approaches for finding the optimal solution for the SVM. First we consider the loss view of SVM 8.2.2 and ex- press this as an unconstrained optimization problem. Then we express the constrained versions of the primal and dual SVMs as quadratic programs in standard form 7.3.2.
  Consider the loss function view of the SVM (12.31). This is a convex unconstrained optimization problem, but the hinge loss (12.28) is not dif-

12.5 Numerical Solution	391
ferentiable. Therefore, we apply a subgradient approach for solving it. However, the hinge loss is differentiable almost everywhere, except for one single point at the hinge t = 1. At this point, the gradient is a set of possible values that lie between 0 and 1. Therefore, the subgradient g of the hinge loss is given by

g(t) =

???-1	t < 1
??0	t > 1

Using this subgradient, we can apply the optimization methods presented in Section 7.1.
  Both the primal and the dual SVM result in a convex quadratic pro- gramming problem (constrained optimization). Note that the primal SVM in (12.26a) has optimization variables that have the size of the dimen- sion D of the input examples. The dual SVM in (12.41) has optimization variables that have the size of the number N of examples.
  To express the primal SVM in the standard form (7.45) for quadratic programming, let us assume that we use the dot product (3.5) as the
inner product. We rearrange the equation for the primal SVM (12.26a),  Recall from

such that the optimization variables are all on the right and the inequality of the constraint matches the standard form. This yields the optimization
N

Section 3.2 that we use the phrase dot product to mean the inner product on

min
w,b,?

1 w 2 + C	?
n=1


(12.55)

Euclidean vector space.

subject to	-ynxn?w - ynb - ?n ? -1
-?n ? 0
n = 1, . . . , N . By concatenating the variables w, b, xn into a single vector, and carefully collecting the terms, we obtain the following matrix form of the soft margin SVM:



min

1 ?w?? (


	



ID	0D,N +1
0


w
? b ? +

[0D+1,1	C1N,1]?


w
? b ?

( -Y X	-y	-IN

l ?w?

(-1N,1l

subject to

0N,D+1

-IN

? b ? ?



.
0N,1



(12.56)

In the preceding optimization problem, the minimization is over the pa- rameters [w?, b, ??]? ? RD+1+N , and we use the notation: Im to rep- resent the identity matrix of size m × m, 0m,n to represent the matrix of zeros of size m × n, and 1m,n to represent the matrix of ones of size m × n. In addition, y is the vector of labels [y1, · · · , yN ]?, Y = diag(y)

is an N by N matrix where the elements of the diagonal are from y, and
X  RN×D is the matrix obtained by concatenating all the examples.
  We can similarly perform a collection of terms for the dual version of the SVM (12.41). To express the dual SVM in standard form, we first have to express the kernel matrix K such that each entry is Kij = k(xi, xj). If we have an explicit feature representation xi then we define Kij = xi, xj . For convenience of notation we introduce a matrix with zeros everywhere except on the diagonal, where we store the labels, that is, Y = diag(y). The dual SVM can be written as


min

1 a?Y KY a - 1?  a

a


subject to

2
y?
-y?
?-IN ?



N,1


0N +2,1 . C1N,1


(12.57)

Remark. In Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2, we introduced the standard forms of the constraints to be inequality constraints. We will express the dual SVM's equality constraint as two inequality constraints, i.e.,
     Ax = b	is replaced by	Ax ? b	and	Ax ? b .	(12.58)
Particular software implementations of convex optimization methods may provide the ability to express equality constraints.	?
  Since there are many different possible views of the SVM, there are many approaches for solving the resulting optimization problem. The ap- proach presented here, expressing the SVM problem in standard convex optimization form, is not often used in practice. The two main implemen- tations of SVM solvers are Chang and Lin (2011) (which is open source) and Joachims (1999). Since SVMs have a clear and well-defined optimiza- tion problem, many approaches based on numerical optimization tech- niques (Nocedal and Wright, 2006) can be applied (Shawe-Taylor and Sun, 2011).


12.6 Further Reading
The SVM is one of many approaches for studying binary classification. Other approaches include the perceptron, logistic regression, Fisher dis- criminant, nearest neighbor, naive Bayes, and random forest (Bishop, 2006; Murphy, 2012). A short tutorial on SVMs and kernels on discrete se- quences can be found in Ben-Hur et al. (2008). The development of SVMs is closely linked to empirical risk minimization, discussed in Section 8.2. Hence, the SVM has strong theoretical properties (Vapnik, 2000; Stein- wart and Christmann, 2008). The book about kernel methods (Scho¨lkopf and Smola, 2002) includes many details of support vector machines and

12.6 Further Reading	393
how to optimize them. A broader book about kernel methods (Shawe- Taylor and Cristianini, 2004) also includes many linear algebra approaches for different machine learning problems.
  An alternative derivation of the dual SVM can be obtained using the idea of the Legendre-Fenchel transform (Section 7.3.3). The derivation considers each term of the unconstrained formulation of the SVM (12.31) separately and calculates their convex conjugates (Rifkin and Lippert, 2007). Readers interested in the functional analysis view (also the reg- ularization methods view) of SVMs are referred to the work by Wahba (1990). Theoretical exposition of kernels (Aronszajn, 1950; Schwartz, 1964; Saitoh, 1988; Manton and Amblard, 2015) requires a basic ground- ing in linear operators (Akhiezer and Glazman, 1993). The idea of kernels have been generalized to Banach spaces (Zhang et al., 2009) and Kre?in spaces (Ong et al., 2004; Loosli et al., 2016).
  Observe that the hinge loss has three equivalent representations, as shown in (12.28) and (12.29), as well as the constrained optimization problem in (12.33). The formulation (12.28) is often used when compar- ing the SVM loss function with other loss functions (Steinwart, 2007). The two-piece formulation (12.29) is convenient for computing subgra- dients, as each piece is linear. The third formulation (12.33), as seen in Section 12.5, enables the use of convex quadratic programming (Sec- tion 7.3.2) tools.
  Since binary classification is a well-studied task in machine learning, other words are also sometimes used, such as discrimination, separation, and decision. Furthermore, there are three quantities that can be the out- put of a binary classifier. First is the output of the linear function itself (often called the score), which can take any real value. This output can be used for ranking the examples, and binary classification can be thought of as picking a threshold on the ranked examples (Shawe-Taylor and Cris- tianini, 2004). The second quantity that is often considered the output of a binary classifier is the output determined after it is passed through a non-linear function to constrain its value to a bounded range, for ex- ample in the interval [0, 1]. A common non-linear function is the sigmoid function (Bishop, 2006). When the non-linearity results in well-calibrated probabilities (Gneiting and Raftery, 2007; Reid and Williamson, 2011), this is called class probability estimation. The third output of a binary classifier is the final binary decision +1, 1 , which is the one most com- monly assumed to be the output of the classifier.
  The SVM is a binary classifier that does not naturally lend itself to a probabilistic interpretation. There are several approaches for converting the raw output of the linear function (the score) into a calibrated class probability estimate (P (Y = 1 X = x)) that involve an additional cal- ibration step (Platt, 2000; Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001; Lin et al., 2007). From the training perspective, there are many related probabilistic ap- proaches. We mentioned at the end of Section 12.2.5 that there is a re-

lationship between loss function and the likelihood (also compare Sec- tions 8.2 and 8.3). The maximum likelihood approach corresponding to a well-calibrated transformation during training is called logistic regres- sion, which comes from a class of methods called generalized linear mod- els. Details of logistic regression from this point of view can be found in Agresti (2002, chapter 5) and McCullagh and Nelder (1989, chapter 4). Naturally, one could take a more Bayesian view of the classifier output by estimating a posterior distribution using Bayesian logistic regression. The Bayesian view also includes the specification of the prior, which includes design choices such as conjugacy (Section 6.6.1) with the likelihood. Ad- ditionally, one could consider latent functions as priors, which results in Gaussian process classification (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006, chapter 3).









References


Abel, Niels H. 1826. D´emonstration de l'Impossibilit´e de la R´esolution Alg´ebrique des E´quations G´en´erales qui Passent le Quatri`eme Degr´e. Grøndahl and Søn.
Adhikari, Ani, and DeNero, John. 2018. Computational and Inferential Thinking: The Foundations of Data Science. Gitbooks.
Agarwal, Arvind, and Daum´e III, Hal. 2010. A Geometric View of Conjugate Priors.
Machine Learning, 81(1), 99-113.
Agresti, A. 2002. Categorical Data Analysis. Wiley.
Akaike, Hirotugu. 1974. A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 19(6), 716-723.
Akhiezer, Naum I., and Glazman, Izrail M. 1993. Theory of Linear Operators in Hilbert Space. Dover Publications.
Alpaydin, Ethem. 2010. Introduction to Machine Learning. MIT Press.
Amari, Shun-ichi. 2016. Information Geometry and Its Applications. Springer. Argyriou, Andreas, and Dinuzzo, Francesco. 2014. A Unifying View of Representer
Theorems. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Aronszajn, Nachman. 1950. Theory of Reproducing Kernels. Transactions of the Amer- ican Mathematical Society, 68, 337-404.
Axler, Sheldon. 2015. Linear Algebra Done Right. Springer.
Bakir, Go¨khan, Hofmann, Thomas, Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, Smola, Alexander J., Taskar, Ben, and Vishwanathan, S. V. N. (eds). 2007. Predicting Structured Data. MIT Press. Barber, David. 2012. Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning. Cambridge University
Press.
Barndorff-Nielsen, Ole. 2014. Information and Exponential Families: In Statistical The- ory. Wiley.
Bartholomew, David, Knott, Martin, and Moustaki, Irini. 2011. Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis: A Unified Approach. Wiley.
Baydin, Atilim G., Pearlmutter, Barak A., Radul, Alexey A., and Siskind, Jeffrey M. 2018. Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: A Survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18, 1-43.
Beck, Amir, and Teboulle, Marc. 2003. Mirror Descent and Nonlinear Projected Subgra- dient Methods for Convex Optimization. Operations Research Letters, 31(3), 167- 175.
Belabbas, Mohamed-Ali, and Wolfe, Patrick J. 2009. Spectral Methods in Machine Learning and New Strategies for Very Large Datasets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 0810600105.
Belkin, Mikhail, and Niyogi, Partha. 2003. Laplacian Eigenmaps for Dimensionality Reduction and Data Representation. Neural Computation, 15(6), 1373-1396.
Ben-Hur, Asa, Ong, Cheng Soon, Sonnenburg, So¨ren, Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, and Ra¨tsch, Gunnar. 2008. Support Vector Machines and Kernels for Computational Biology. PLoS Computational Biology, 4(10), e1000173.

395
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.


Bennett, Kristin P., and Bredensteiner, Erin J. 2000a. Duality and Geometry in SVM Classifiers. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Bennett, Kristin P., and Bredensteiner, Erin J. 2000b. Geometry in Learning. Pages 132-145 of: Geometry at Work. Mathematical Association of America.
Berlinet, Alain, and Thomas-Agnan, Christine. 2004. Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces in Probability and Statistics. Springer.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 1999. Nonlinear Programming. Athena Scientific. Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 2009. Convex Optimization Theory. Athena Scientific.
Bickel, Peter J., and Doksum, Kjell. 2006. Mathematical Statistics, Basic Ideas and Selected Topics. Vol. 1. Prentice Hall.
Bickson, Danny, Dolev, Danny, Shental, Ori, Siegel, Paul H., and Wolf, Jack K. 2007. Linear Detection via Belief Propagation. In: Proceedings of the Annual Allerton Con- ference on Communication, Control, and Computing.
Billingsley, Patrick. 1995. Probability and Measure. Wiley.
Bishop, Christopher M. 1995. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Clarendon Press.
Bishop, Christopher M. 1999. Bayesian PCA. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro- cessing Systems.
Bishop, Christopher M. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer. Blei, David M., Kucukelbir, Alp, and McAuliffe, Jon D. 2017. Variational Inference: A
Review for Statisticians. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 112(518), 859-877.
Blum, Arvim, and Hardt, Moritz. 2015. The Ladder: A Reliable Leaderboard for Ma- chine Learning Competitions. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
Bonnans, J. Fr´ed´eric, Gilbert, J. Charles, Lemar´echal, Claude, and Sagastiza´bal, Clau- dia A. 2006. Numerical Optimization: Theoretical and Practical Aspects. Springer.
Borwein, Jonathan M., and Lewis, Adrian S. 2006. Convex Analysis and Nonlinear Optimization. 2nd edn. Canadian Mathematical Society.
Bottou, L´eon. 1998. Online Algorithms and Stochastic Approximations. Pages 9-42 of: Online Learning and Neural Networks. Cambridge University Press.
Bottou, L´eon, Curtis, Frank E., and Nocedal, Jorge. 2018. Optimization Methods for Large-Scale Machine Learning. SIAM Review, 60(2), 223-311.
Boucheron, Stephane, Lugosi, Gabor, and Massart, Pascal. 2013. Concentration In- equalities: A Nonasymptotic Theory of Independence. Oxford University Press.
Boyd, Stephen, and Vandenberghe, Lieven. 2004. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press.
Boyd, Stephen, and Vandenberghe, Lieven. 2018. Introduction to Applied Linear Alge- bra. Cambridge University Press.
Brochu, Eric, Cora, Vlad M., and de Freitas, Nando. 2009. A Tutorial on Bayesian Optimization of Expensive Cost Functions, with Application to Active User Modeling and Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning. Tech. rept. TR-2009-023. Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia.
Brooks, Steve, Gelman, Andrew, Jones, Galin L., and Meng, Xiao-Li (eds). 2011. Hand- book of Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Brown, Lawrence D. 1986. Fundamentals of Statistical Exponential Families: With Ap- plications in Statistical Decision Theory. Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Bryson, Arthur E. 1961. A Gradient Method for Optimizing Multi-Stage Allocation Processes. In: Proceedings of the Harvard University Symposium on Digital Computers and Their Applications.
Bubeck, S´ebastien. 2015. Convex Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity. Founda- tions and Trends in Machine Learning, 8(3-4), 231-357.
Bu¨hlmann, Peter, and Van De Geer, Sara. 2011. Statistics for High-Dimensional Data.
Springer.


Burges, Christopher. 2010. Dimension Reduction: A Guided Tour. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2(4), 275-365.
Carroll, J Douglas, and Chang, Jih-Jie. 1970. Analysis of Individual Differences in Multidimensional Scaling via an N-Way Generalization of "Eckart-Young" Decom- position. Psychometrika, 35(3), 283-319.
Casella, George, and Berger, Roger L. 2002. Statistical Inference. Duxbury. C¸inlar, Erhan. 2011. Probability and Stochastics. Springer.
Chang, Chih-Chung, and Lin, Chih-Jen. 2011. LIBSVM: A Library for Support Vector Machines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2, 27:1-27:27.
Cheeseman, Peter. 1985. In Defense of Probability. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Chollet, Francois, and Allaire, J. J. 2018. Deep Learning with R. Manning Publications. Codd, Edgar F. 1990. The Relational Model for Database Management. Addison-Wesley
Longman Publishing.
Cunningham, John P., and Ghahramani, Zoubin. 2015. Linear Dimensionality Reduc- tion: Survey, Insights, and Generalizations. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16, 2859-2900.
Datta, Biswa N. 2010. Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications. SIAM.
Davidson, Anthony C., and Hinkley, David V. 1997. Bootstrap Methods and Their Appli- cation. Cambridge University Press.
Dean, Jeffrey, Corrado, Greg S., Monga, Rajat, and Chen, et al. 2012. Large Scale Distributed Deep Networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Deisenroth, Marc P., and Mohamed, Shakir. 2012. Expectation Propagation in Gaus- sian Process Dynamical Systems. Pages 2618-2626 of: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.
Deisenroth, Marc P., and Ohlsson, Henrik. 2011. A General Perspective on Gaussian Filtering and Smoothing: Explaining Current and Deriving New Algorithms. In: Proceedings of the American Control Conference.
Deisenroth, Marc P., Fox, Dieter, and Rasmussen, Carl E. 2015. Gaussian Processes for Data-Efficient Learning in Robotics and Control. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 37(2), 408-423.
Dempster, Arthur P., Laird, Nan M., and Rubin, Donald B. 1977. Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the EM Algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 39(1), 1-38.
Deng, Li, Seltzer, Michael L., Yu, Dong, Acero, Alex, Mohamed, Abdel-rahman, and Hinton, Geoffrey E. 2010. Binary Coding of Speech Spectrograms Using a Deep Auto-Encoder. In: Proceedings of Interspeech.
Devroye, Luc. 1986. Non-Uniform Random Variate Generation. Springer.
Donoho, David L., and Grimes, Carrie. 2003. Hessian Eigenmaps: Locally Linear Embedding Techniques for High-Dimensional Data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(10), 5591-5596.
Dosta´l, Zden?ek. 2009. Optimal Quadratic Programming Algorithms: With Applications to Variational Inequalities. Springer.
Douven, Igor. 2017. Abduction. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Meta- physics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Downey, Allen B. 2014. Think Stats: Exploratory Data Analysis. 2nd edn. O'Reilly Media.
Dreyfus, Stuart. 1962. The Numerical Solution of Variational Problems. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 5(1), 30-45.
Drumm, Volker, and Weil, Wolfgang. 2001. Lineare Algebra und Analytische Geometrie.
Lecture Notes, Universita¨t Karlsruhe (TH).
Dudley, Richard M. 2002. Real Analysis and Probability. Cambridge University Press.


Eaton, Morris L. 2007. Multivariate Statistics: A Vector Space Approach. Institute of Mathematical Statistics Lecture Notes.
Eckart, Carl, and Young, Gale. 1936. The Approximation of One Matrix by Another of Lower Rank. Psychometrika, 1(3), 211-218.
Efron, Bradley, and Hastie, Trevor. 2016. Computer Age Statistical Inference: Algorithms, Evidence and Data Science. Cambridge University Press.
Efron, Bradley, and Tibshirani, Robert J. 1993. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Chap- man and Hall/CRC.
Elliott, Conal. 2009. Beautiful Differentiation. In: International Conference on Func- tional Programming.
Evgeniou, Theodoros, Pontil, Massimiliano, and Poggio, Tomaso. 2000. Statistical Learning Theory: A Primer. International Journal of Computer Vision, 38(1), 9-13.
Fan, Rong-En, Chang, Kai-Wei, Hsieh, Cho-Jui, Wang, Xiang-Rui, and Lin, Chih-Jen. 2008. LIBLINEAR: A Library for Large Linear Classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 1871-1874.
Gal, Yarin, van der Wilk, Mark, and Rasmussen, Carl E. 2014. Distributed Variational Inference in Sparse Gaussian Process Regression and Latent Variable Models. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Ga¨rtner, Thomas. 2008. Kernels for Structured Data. World Scientific.
Gavish, Matanv, and Donoho, David L. 2014. The Optimal Hard Threshold for Singular
Values is 4 3. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 60(8), 5040-5053.
Gelman, Andrew, Carlin, John B., Stern, Hal S., and Rubin, Donald B. 2004. Bayesian Data Analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Gentle, James E. 2004.	Random Number Generation and Monte Carlo Methods.
Springer.
Ghahramani, Zoubin. 2015. Probabilistic Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence.
Nature, 521, 452-459.
Ghahramani, Zoubin, and Roweis, Sam T. 1999. Learning Nonlinear Dynamical Sys- tems Using an EM Algorithm. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. MIT Press.
Gilks, Walter R., Richardson, Sylvia, and Spiegelhalter, David J. 1996. Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Gneiting, Tilmann, and Raftery, Adrian E. 2007. Strictly Proper Scoring Rules, Pre- diction, and Estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477), 359-378.
Goh, Gabriel. 2017. Why Momentum Really Works. Distill.
Gohberg, Israel, Goldberg, Seymour, and Krupnik, Nahum. 2012. Traces and Determi- nants of Linear Operators. Birkha¨user.
Golan, Jonathan S. 2007. The Linear Algebra a Beginning Graduate Student Ought to Know. Springer.
Golub, Gene H., and Van Loan, Charles F. 2012. Matrix Computations. JHU Press. Goodfellow, Ian, Bengio, Yoshua, and Courville, Aaron. 2016. Deep Learning. MIT
Press.
Graepel, Thore, Candela, Joaquin Quin˜onero-Candela, Borchert, Thomas, and Her- brich, Ralf. 2010. Web-Scale Bayesian Click-through Rate Prediction for Sponsored Search Advertising in Microsoft's Bing Search Engine. In: Proceedings of the Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning.
Griewank, Andreas, and Walther, Andrea. 2003. Introduction to Automatic Differenti- ation. In: Proceedings in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics.
Griewank, Andreas, and Walther, Andrea. 2008. Evaluating Derivatives, Principles and Techniques of Algorithmic Differentiation. SIAM.
Grimmett, Geoffrey R., and Welsh, Dominic. 2014. Probability: An Introduction. Oxford University Press.


Grinstead, Charles M., and Snell, J. Laurie. 1997. Introduction to Probability. American Mathematical Society.
Hacking, Ian. 2001. Probability and Inductive Logic. Cambridge University Press. Hall, Peter. 1992. The Bootstrap and Edgeworth Expansion. Springer.
Hallin, Marc, Paindaveine, Davy, and S?iman, Miroslav. 2010. Multivariate Quan-
tiles and Multiple-Output Regression Quantiles: From l1 Optimization to Halfspace Depth. Annals of Statistics, 38, 635-669.
Hasselblatt, Boris, and Katok, Anatole. 2003. A First Course in Dynamics with a Panorama of Recent Developments. Cambridge University Press.
Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert, and Friedman, Jerome. 2001. The Elements of Sta- tistical Learning - Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer.
Hausman, Karol, Springenberg, Jost T., Wang, Ziyu, Heess, Nicolas, and Riedmiller, Martin. 2018. Learning an Embedding Space for Transferable Robot Skills. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations.
Hazan, Elad. 2015. Introduction to Online Convex Optimization. Foundations and Trends in Optimization, 2(3-4), 157-325.
Hensman, James, Fusi, Nicolo`, and Lawrence, Neil D. 2013. Gaussian Processes for Big Data. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Herbrich, Ralf, Minka, Tom, and Graepel, Thore. 2007. TrueSkill(TM): A Bayesian Skill Rating System. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Hiriart-Urruty, Jean-Baptiste, and Lemar´echal, Claude. 2001. Fundamentals of Convex Analysis. Springer.
Hoffman, Matthew D., Blei, David M., and Bach, Francis. 2010. Online Learning for Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Hoffman, Matthew D., Blei, David M., Wang, Chong, and Paisley, John. 2013. Stochas- tic Variational Inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(1), 1303-1347. Hofmann, Thomas, Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, and Smola, Alexander J. 2008. Kernel Meth-
ods in Machine Learning. Annals of Statistics, 36(3), 1171-1220.
Hogben, Leslie. 2013. Handbook of Linear Algebra. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Horn, Roger A., and Johnson, Charles R. 2013. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press.
Hotelling, Harold. 1933. Analysis of a Complex of Statistical Variables into Principal Components. Journal of Educational Psychology, 24, 417-441.
Hyvarinen, Aapo, Oja, Erkki, and Karhunen, Juha. 2001. Independent Component Anal- ysis. Wiley.
Imbens, Guido W., and Rubin, Donald B. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social and Biomedical Sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Jacod, Jean, and Protter, Philip. 2004. Probability Essentials. Springer.
Jaynes, Edwin T. 2003. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press.
Jefferys, William H., and Berger, James O. 1992. Ockham's Razor and Bayesian Anal- ysis. American Scientist, 80, 64-72.
Jeffreys, Harold. 1961. Theory of Probability. Oxford University Press.
Jimenez Rezende, Danilo, and Mohamed, Shakir. 2015. Variational Inference with Nor- malizing Flows. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. Jimenez Rezende, Danilo, Mohamed, Shakir, and Wierstra, Daan. 2014. Stochastic Backpropagation and Approximate Inference in Deep Generative Models. In: Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Joachims, Thorsten. 1999. Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning. MIT Press. Chap. Making Large-Scale SVM Learning Practical, pages 169-184.
Jordan, Michael I., Ghahramani, Zoubin, Jaakkola, Tommi S., and Saul, Lawrence K. 1999. An Introduction to Variational Methods for Graphical Models. Machine Learn- ing, 37, 183-233.


Julier, Simon J., and Uhlmann, Jeffrey K. 1997. A New Extension of the Kalman Filter to Nonlinear Systems. In: Proceedings of AeroSense Symposium on Aerospace/Defense Sensing, Simulation and Controls.
Kaiser, Marcus, and Hilgetag, Claus C. 2006. Nonoptimal Component Placement, but Short Processing Paths, Due to Long-Distance Projections in Neural Systems. PLoS Computational Biology, 2(7), e95.
Kalman, Dan. 1996. A Singularly Valuable Decomposition: The SVD of a Matrix. Col- lege Mathematics Journal, 27(1), 2-23.
Kalman, Rudolf E. 1960. A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems.
Transactions of the ASME - Journal of Basic Engineering, 82(Series D), 35-45.
Kamthe, Sanket, and Deisenroth, Marc P. 2018. Data-Efficient Reinforcement Learning with Probabilistic Model Predictive Control. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Katz, Victor J. 2004. A History of Mathematics. Pearson/Addison-Wesley.
Kelley, Henry J. 1960. Gradient Theory of Optimal Flight Paths. Ars Journal, 30(10), 947-954.
Kimeldorf, George S., and Wahba, Grace. 1970. A Correspondence between Bayesian Estimation on Stochastic Processes and Smoothing by Splines. Annals of Mathemat- ical Statistics, 41(2), 495-502.
Kingma, Diederik P., and Welling, Max. 2014. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations.
Kittler, Josef, and Fo¨glein, Janos. 1984. Contextual Classification of Multispectral Pixel Data. Image and Vision Computing, 2(1), 13-29.
Kolda, Tamara G., and Bader, Brett W. 2009. Tensor Decompositions and Applications.
SIAM Review, 51(3), 455-500.
Koller, Daphne, and Friedman, Nir. 2009. Probabilistic Graphical Models. MIT Press. Kong, Linglong, and Mizera, Ivan. 2012. Quantile Tomography: Using Quantiles with
Multivariate Data. Statistica Sinica, 22, 1598-1610.
Lang, Serge. 1987. Linear Algebra. Springer.
Lawrence, Neil D. 2005. Probabilistic Non-Linear Principal Component Analysis with Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(Nov.), 1783-1816.
Leemis, Lawrence M., and McQueston, Jacquelyn T. 2008. Univariate Distribution Relationships. American Statistician, 62(1), 45-53.
Lehmann, Erich L., and Romano, Joseph P. 2005. Testing Statistical Hypotheses.
Springer.
Lehmann, Erich Leo, and Casella, George. 1998. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer. Liesen, Jo¨rg, and Mehrmann, Volker. 2015. Linear Algebra. Springer.
Lin, Hsuan-Tien, Lin, Chih-Jen, and Weng, Ruby C. 2007. A Note on Platt's Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines. Machine Learning, 68, 267-276.
Ljung, Lennart. 1999. System Identification: Theory for the User. Prentice Hall.
Loosli, Ga¨elle, Canu, St´ephane, and Ong, Cheng Soon. 2016. Learning SVM in Kre?in Spaces. IEEE Transactions of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 38(6), 1204- 1216.
Luenberger, David G. 1969. Optimization by Vector Space Methods. Wiley.
MacKay, David J. C. 1992. Bayesian Interpolation. Neural Computation, 4, 415-447. MacKay, David J. C. 1998. Introduction to Gaussian Processes. Pages 133-165 of:
Bishop, C. M. (ed), Neural Networks and Machine Learning. Springer.
MacKay, David J. C. 2003. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms.
Cambridge University Press.
Magnus, Jan R., and Neudecker, Heinz. 2007. Matrix Differential Calculus with Appli- cations in Statistics and Econometrics. Wiley.


Manton, Jonathan H., and Amblard, Pierre-Olivier. 2015. A Primer on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces. Foundations and Trends in Signal Processing, 8(1-2), 1-126. Markovsky, Ivan. 2011. Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Appli-
cations. Springer.
Maybeck, Peter S. 1979. Stochastic Models, Estimation, and Control. Academic Press. McCullagh, Peter, and Nelder, John A. 1989. Generalized Linear Models. CRC Press.
McEliece, Robert J., MacKay, David J. C., and Cheng, Jung-Fu. 1998. Turbo Decoding as an Instance of Pearl's "Belief Propagation" Algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 16(2), 140-152.
Mika, Sebastian, Ra¨tsch, Gunnar, Weston, Jason, Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, and Mu¨ller, Klaus-Robert. 1999. Fisher Discriminant Analysis with Kernels. Pages 41-48 of: Proceedings of the Workshop on Neural Networks for Signal Processing.
Minka, Thomas P. 2001a. A Family of Algorithms for Approximate Bayesian Inference.
Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Minka, Tom. 2001b. Automatic Choice of Dimensionality of PCA. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Mitchell, Tom. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill.
Mnih, Volodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, and Silver, David, et al. 2015. Human-Level Control through Deep Reinforcement Learning. Nature, 518, 529-533.
Moonen, Marc, and De Moor, Bart. 1995. SVD and Signal Processing, III: Algorithms, Architectures and Applications. Elsevier.
Moustaki, Irini, Knott, Martin, and Bartholomew, David J. 2015. Latent-Variable Mod- eling. American Cancer Society. Pages 1-10.
Mu¨ller, Andreas C., and Guido, Sarah. 2016. Introduction to Machine Learning with Python: A Guide for Data Scientists. O'Reilly Publishing.
Murphy, Kevin P. 2012. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press.
Neal, Radford M. 1996. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Ph.D. thesis, Depart- ment of Computer Science, University of Toronto.
Neal, Radford M., and Hinton, Geoffrey E. 1999. A View of the EM Algorithm that Justifies Incremental, Sparse, and Other Variants. Pages 355-368 of: Learning in Graphical Models. MIT Press.
Nelsen, Roger. 2006. An Introduction to Copulas. Springer. Nesterov, Yuri. 2018. Lectures on Convex Optimization. Springer.
Neumaier, Arnold. 1998. Solving Ill-Conditioned and Singular Linear Systems: A Tu- torial on Regularization. SIAM Review, 40, 636-666.
Nocedal, Jorge, and Wright, Stephen J. 2006. Numerical Optimization. Springer. Nowozin, Sebastian, Gehler, Peter V., Jancsary, Jeremy, and Lampert, Christoph H.
(eds). 2014. Advanced Structured Prediction. MIT Press.
O'Hagan, Anthony. 1991. Bayes-Hermite Quadrature. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 29, 245-260.
Ong, Cheng Soon, Mary, Xavier, Canu, St´ephane, and Smola, Alexander J. 2004. Learn- ing with Non-Positive Kernels. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Ormoneit, Dirk, Sidenbladh, Hedvig, Black, Michael J., and Hastie, Trevor. 2001. Learning and Tracking Cyclic Human Motion. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Page, Lawrence, Brin, Sergey, Motwani, Rajeev, and Winograd, Terry. 1999. The PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web. Tech. rept. Stanford Info- Lab.
Paquet, Ulrich. 2008. Bayesian Inference for Latent Variable Models. Ph.D. thesis, Uni- versity of Cambridge.
Parzen, Emanuel. 1962. On Estimation of a Probability Density Function and Mode.
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 33(3), 1065-1076.


Pearl, Judea. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Pearl, Judea. 2009. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press.
Pearson, Karl. 1895. Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution. II. Skew Variation in Homogeneous Material. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 186, 343-414.
Pearson, Karl. 1901. On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit to Systems of Points in Space.
Philosophical Magazine, 2(11), 559-572.
Peters, Jonas, Janzing, Dominik, and Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard. 2017. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms. MIT Press.
Petersen, Kaare B., and Pedersen, Michael S. 2012. The Matrix Cookbook. Tech. rept.
Technical University of Denmark.
Platt, John C. 2000. Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines and Compar- isons to Regularized Likelihood Methods. In: Advances in Large Margin Classifiers.
Pollard, David. 2002. A User's Guide to Measure Theoretic Probability. Cambridge University Press.
Polyak, Roman A. 2016. The Legendre Transformation in Modern Optimization. Pages 437-507 of: Goldengorin, B. (ed), Optimization and Its Applications in Control and Data Sciences. Springer.
Press, William H., Teukolsky, Saul A., Vetterling, William T., and Flannery, Brian P. 2007. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press.
Proschan, Michael A., and Presnell, Brett. 1998. Expect the Unexpected from Condi- tional Expectation. American Statistician, 52(3), 248-252.
Raschka, Sebastian, and Mirjalili, Vahid. 2017. Python Machine Learning: Machine Learning and Deep Learning with Python, scikit-learn, and TensorFlow. Packt Publish- ing.
Rasmussen, Carl E., and Ghahramani, Zoubin. 2001. Occam's Razor. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Rasmussen, Carl E., and Ghahramani, Zoubin. 2003. Bayesian Monte Carlo. In: Ad- vances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Rasmussen, Carl E., and Williams, Christopher K. I. 2006. Gaussian Processes for Ma- chine Learning. MIT Press.
Reid, Mark, and Williamson, Robert C. 2011. Information, Divergence and Risk for Binary Experiments. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 731-817.
Rifkin, Ryan M., and Lippert, Ross A. 2007. Value Regularization and Fenchel Duality.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8, 441-479.
Rockafellar, Ralph T. 1970. Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press.
Rogers, Simon, and Girolami, Mark. 2016. A First Course in Machine Learning. Chap- man and Hall/CRC.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2017. Observation and Experiment: An Introduction to Causal Inference. Harvard University Press.
Rosenblatt, Murray. 1956. Remarks on Some Nonparametric Estimates of a Density Function. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27(3), 832-837.
Roweis, Sam T. 1998. EM Algorithms for PCA and SPCA. Pages 626-632 of: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Roweis, Sam T., and Ghahramani, Zoubin. 1999. A Unifying Review of Linear Gaussian Models. Neural Computation, 11(2), 305-345.
Roy, Anindya, and Banerjee, Sudipto. 2014. Linear Algebra and Matrix Analysis for Statistics. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Rubinstein, Reuven Y., and Kroese, Dirk P. 2016. Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method. Wiley.


Ruffini, Paolo. 1799. Teoria Generale delle Equazioni, in cui si Dimostra Impossibile la Soluzione Algebraica delle Equazioni Generali di Grado Superiore al Quarto. Stampe- ria di S. Tommaso d'Aquino.
Rumelhart, David E., Hinton, Geoffrey E., and Williams, Ronald J. 1986. Learning Representations by Back-Propagating Errors. Nature, 323(6088), 533-536.
Sæmundsson, Steindo´r, Hofmann, Katja, and Deisenroth, Marc P. 2018. Meta Rein- forcement Learning with Latent Variable Gaussian Processes. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Saitoh, Saburou. 1988. Theory of Reproducing Kernels and its Applications. Longman Scientific and Technical.
Sa¨rkka¨, Simo. 2013. Bayesian Filtering and Smoothing. Cambridge University Press. Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, and Smola, Alexander J. 2002. Learning with Kernels - Support
Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond. MIT Press.
Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, Smola, Alexander J., and Mu¨ller, Klaus-Robert. 1997. Kernel Principal Component Analysis. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks.
Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, Smola, Alexander J., and Mu¨ller, Klaus-Robert. 1998. Nonlinear Component Analysis as a Kernel Eigenvalue Problem. Neural Computation, 10(5), 1299-1319.
Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, Herbrich, Ralf, and Smola, Alexander J. 2001. A Generalized Representer Theorem. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computa- tional Learning Theory.
Schwartz, Laurent. 1964. Sous Espaces Hilbertiens d'Espaces Vectoriels Topologiques et Noyaux Associ´es. Journal d'Analyse Math´ematique, 13, 115-256.
Schwarz, Gideon E. 1978. Estimating the Dimension of a Model. Annals of Statistics,
6(2), 461-464.
Shahriari, Bobak, Swersky, Kevin, Wang, Ziyu, Adams, Ryan P., and De Freitas, Nando. 2016. Taking the Human out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1), 148-175.
Shalev-Shwartz, Shai, and Ben-David, Shai. 2014. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms. Cambridge University Press.
Shawe-Taylor, John, and Cristianini, Nello. 2004. Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis.
Cambridge University Press.
Shawe-Taylor, John, and Sun, Shiliang. 2011. A Review of Optimization Methodologies in Support Vector Machines. Neurocomputing, 74(17), 3609-3618.
Shental, Ori, Siegel, Paul H., Wolf, Jack K., Bickson, Danny, and Dolev, Danny. 2008. Gaussian Belief Propagation Solver for Systems of Linear Equations. Pages 1863- 1867 of: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Information Theory.
Shewchuk, Jonathan R. 1994. An Introduction to the Conjugate Gradient Method with- out the Agonizing Pain.
Shi, Jianbo, and Malik, Jitendra. 2000. Normalized Cuts and Image Segmentation.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(8), 888-905.
Shi, Qinfeng, Petterson, James, Dror, Gideon, Langford, John, Smola, Alexander J., and Vishwanathan, S. V. N. 2009. Hash Kernels for Structured Data. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2615-2637.
Shiryayev, Albert N. 1984. Probability. Springer.
Shor, Naum Z. 1985. Minimization Methods for Non-Differentiable Functions. Springer. Shotton, Jamie, Winn, John, Rother, Carsten, and Criminisi, Antonio. 2006. Texton- Boost: Joint Appearance, Shape and Context Modeling for Multi-Class Object Recog- nition and Segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision.
Smith, Adrian F. M., and Spiegelhalter, David. 1980. Bayes Factors and Choice Criteria for Linear Models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 42(2), 213-220.


Snoek, Jasper, Larochelle, Hugo, and Adams, Ryan P. 2012. Practical Bayesian Op- timization of Machine Learning Algorithms. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Spearman, Charles. 1904. "General Intelligence," Objectively Determined and Mea- sured. American Journal of Psychology, 15(2), 201-292.
Sriperumbudur, Bharath K., Gretton, Arthur, Fukumizu, Kenji, Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard, and Lanckriet, Gert R. G. 2010. Hilbert Space Embeddings and Metrics on Proba- bility Measures. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11, 1517-1561.
Steinwart, Ingo. 2007. How to Compare Different Loss Functions and Their Risks.
Constructive Approximation, 26, 225-287.
Steinwart, Ingo, and Christmann, Andreas. 2008. Support Vector Machines. Springer. Stoer, Josef, and Burlirsch, Roland. 2002. Introduction to Numerical Analysis. Springer. Strang, Gilbert. 1993. The Fundamental Theorem of Linear Algebra. The American
Mathematical Monthly, 100(9), 848-855.
Strang, Gilbert. 2003. Introduction to Linear Algebra. Wellesley-Cambridge Press. Stray, Jonathan. 2016. The Curious Journalist's Guide to Data. Tow Center for Digital
Journalism at Columbia's Graduate School of Journalism.
Strogatz, Steven. 2014. Writing about Math for the Perplexed and the Traumatized.
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 61(3), 286-291.
Sucar, Luis E., and Gillies, Duncan F. 1994. Probabilistic Reasoning in High-Level Vision. Image and Vision Computing, 12(1), 42-60.
Szeliski, Richard, Zabih, Ramin, and Scharstein, Daniel, et al. 2008. A Compar- ative Study of Energy Minimization Methods for Markov Random Fields with Smoothness-Based Priors. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In- telligence, 30(6), 1068-1080.
Tandra, Haryono. 2014. The Relationship between the Change of Variable Theorem and the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for the Lebesgue Integral. Teaching of Mathematics, 17(2), 76-83.
Tenenbaum, Joshua B., De Silva, Vin, and Langford, John C. 2000. A Global Geometric Framework for Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Science, 290(5500), 2319- 2323.
Tibshirani, Robert. 1996. Regression Selection and Shrinkage via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 58(1), 267-288.
Tipping, Michael E., and Bishop, Christopher M. 1999. Probabilistic Principal Compo- nent Analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 61(3), 611-622.
Titsias, Michalis K., and Lawrence, Neil D. 2010. Bayesian Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelli- gence and Statistics.
Toussaint, Marc. 2012. Some Notes on Gradient Descent. https://ipvs.informatik.uni- stuttgart.de/mlr/marc/notes/gradientDescent.pdf.
Trefethen, Lloyd N., and Bau III, David. 1997. Numerical Linear Algebra. SIAM. Tucker, Ledyard R. 1966. Some Mathematical Notes on Three-Mode Factor Analysis.
Psychometrika, 31(3), 279-311.
Vapnik, Vladimir N. 1998. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley.
Vapnik, Vladimir N. 1999. An Overview of Statistical Learning Theory. IEEE Transac- tions on Neural Networks, 10(5), 988-999.
Vapnik, Vladimir N. 2000. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer. Vishwanathan, S. V. N., Schraudolph, Nicol N., Kondor, Risi, and Borgwardt,
Karsten M. 2010. Graph Kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11, 1201- 1242.
von Luxburg, Ulrike, and Scho¨lkopf, Bernhard. 2011. Statistical Learning Theory: Models, Concepts, and Results. Pages 651-706 of: D. M. Gabbay, S. Hartmann,
J. Woods (ed), Handbook of the History of Logic, vol. 10. Elsevier.


Wahba, Grace. 1990. Spline Models for Observational Data. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Walpole, Ronald E., Myers, Raymond H., Myers, Sharon L., and Ye, Keying. 2011.
Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists. Prentice Hall.
Wasserman, Larry. 2004. All of Statistics. Springer.
Wasserman, Larry. 2007. All of Nonparametric Statistics. Springer. Whittle, Peter. 2000. Probability via Expectation. Springer.
Wickham, Hadley. 2014. Tidy Data. Journal of Statistical Software, 59, 1-23. Williams, Christopher K. I. 1997. Computing with Infinite Networks. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Yu, Yaoliang, Cheng, Hao, Schuurmans, Dale, and Szepesva´ri, Csaba. 2013. Charac- terizing the Representer Theorem. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Zadrozny, Bianca, and Elkan, Charles. 2001. Obtaining Calibrated Probability Esti- mates from Decision Trees and Naive Bayesian Classifiers. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
Zhang, Haizhang, Xu, Yuesheng, and Zhang, Jun. 2009. Reproducing Kernel Banach Spaces for Machine Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10, 2741-2775. Zia, Royce K. P., Redish, Edward F., and McKay, Susan R. 2009. Making Sense of the
Legendre Transform. American Journal of Physics, 77(614), 614-622.











Index





1-of-K representation, 364
l1 norm, 71
l2 norm, 72
abduction, 258
Abel-Ruffini theorem, 334
Abelian group, 36
absolutely homogeneous, 71
activation function, 315
affine mapping, 63
affine subspace, 61
Akaike information criterion, 288 algebra, 17
algebraic multiplicity, 106
analytic, 143
ancestral sampling, 340, 364
angle, 76
associativity, 24, 26, 36
attribute, 253
augmented matrix, 29
auto-encoder, 343
automatic differentiation, 161
automorphism, 49
backpropagation, 159
basic variable, 30
basis, 44
basis vector, 45
Bayes factor, 287
Bayes' law, 185
Bayes' rule, 185
Bayes' theorem, 185
Bayesian GP-LVM, 347
Bayesian inference, 274
Bayesian information criterion, 288 Bayesian linear regression, 303 Bayesian model selection, 286 Bayesian network, 278, 283
Bayesian PCA, 346
Bernoulli distribution, 205
Beta distribution, 206
bilinear mapping, 72
bijective, 48
binary classification, 370
Binomial distribution, 206
blind-source separation, 346
Borel s-algebra, 180


canonical basis, 45 canonical feature map, 389 canonical link function, 315 categorical variable, 180
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 75
change-of-variable technique, 219
characteristic polynomial, 104
Cholesky decomposition, 114
Cholesky factor, 114
Cholesky factorization, 114
class, 370
classification, 315
closure, 36
code, 343
codirected, 105
codomain, 58, 139
collinear, 105
column, 22
column space, 59
column vector, 22, 38 completing the squares, 307 concave function, 236
condition number, 230
conditional probability, 179
conditionally independent, 195
conjugate, 208
conjugate prior, 208
convex conjugate, 242
convex function, 236
convex hull, 386
convex optimization problem, 236, 239
convex set, 236
coordinate, 50
coordinate representation, 50
coordinate vector, 50
correlation, 191
covariance, 190
covariance matrix, 190, 198
covariate, 253
CP decomposition, 136
cross-covariance, 191
cross-validation, 258, 263
cumulative distribution function, 178, 181
d-separation, 281


407
This material is published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learning by Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (2020). This version is free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale, or use in derivative works.
(c)by M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2023. https://mml-book.com.



data covariance matrix, 318 data point, 253
data-fit term, 302
decoder, 343
deep auto-encoder, 347
defective, 111
denominator layout, 151
derivative, 141
design matrix, 294, 296
determinant, 99
diagonal matrix, 115
diagonalizable, 116
diagonalization, 116
difference quotient, 141
dimension, 45
dimensionality reduction, 317
directed graphical model, 278, 283
direction, 61
direction space, 61
distance, 75
distribution, 177
distributivity, 24, 26
domain, 58, 139
dot product, 72
dual SVM, 385
Eckart-Young theorem, 131, 334
eigendecomposition, 116
eigenspace, 106
eigenspectrum, 106
eigenvalue, 105
eigenvalue equation, 105
eigenvector, 105
elementary transformations, 28
EM algorithm, 360
embarrassingly parallel, 264
empirical covariance, 192
empirical mean, 192
empirical risk, 260
empirical risk minimization, 257, 260
encoder, 343
endomorphism, 49
epigraph, 236
equivalent, 56
error function, 294
error term, 382
Euclidean distance, 72, 75
Euclidean norm, 72 Euclidean vector space, 73 event space, 175
evidence, 186, 285, 306
example, 253
expected risk, 261
expected value, 187
exponential family, 205, 211 extended Kalman filter, 170
factor analysis, 346
factor graph, 283

feature, 253
feature map, 254
feature matrix, 296
feature vector, 295
Fisher discriminant analysis, 136 Fisher-Neyman theorem, 210
forward mode, 161
free variable, 30
full rank, 47
full SVD, 128
fundamental theorem of linear mappings, 60
Gaussian elimination, 31 Gaussian mixture model, 349 Gaussian process, 316
Gaussian process latent-variable model, 347
general linear group, 37 general solution, 28, 30
generalized linear model, 272, 315
generating set, 44
generative process, 272, 286
generator, 344
geometric multiplicity, 108
Givens rotation, 94
global minimum, 225
GP-LVM, 347
gradient, 146
Gram matrix, 389
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, 89
graphical model, 278
group, 36
Hadamard product, 23 hard margin SVM, 377 Hessian, 164
Hessian eigenmaps, 136
Hessian matrix, 165
hinge loss, 381
histogram, 369
hyperparameter, 258
hyperplane, 61, 62
hyperprior, 281
i.i.d., 195
ICA, 346
identity automorphism, 49
identity mapping, 49
identity matrix, 23
image, 58, 139
independent and identically distributed, 195, 260, 266
independent component analysis, 346 inference network, 344
injective, 48
inner product, 73
inner product space, 73 intermediate variables, 162
inverse, 24



inverse element, 36
invertible, 24
Isomap, 136
isomorphism, 49
Jacobian, 146, 150
Jacobian determinant, 152
Jeffreys-Lindley paradox, 287
Jensen's inequality, 239
joint probability, 178
Karhunen-Lo`eve transform, 318
kernel, 33, 47, 58, 254, 388
kernel density estimation, 369 kernel matrix, 389
kernel PCA, 347
kernel trick, 316, 347, 389
label, 253
Lagrange multiplier, 234
Lagrangian, 234
Lagrangian dual problem, 234 Laplace approximation, 170
Laplace expansion, 102
Laplacian eigenmaps, 136
LASSO, 303, 316
latent variable, 275
law, 177, 181
law of total variance, 203 leading coefficient, 30
least-squares loss, 154
least-squares problem, 261
least-squares solution, 88
left-singular vectors, 119
Legendre transform, 242
Legendre-Fenchel transform, 242
length, 71
likelihood, 185, 265, 269, 291
line, 61, 82
linear combination, 40
linear manifold, 61
linear mapping, 48
linear program, 239
linear subspace, 39
linear transformation, 48
linearly dependent, 40
linearly independent, 40
link function, 272
loading, 322
local minimum, 225
log-partition function, 211
logistic regression, 315
logistic sigmoid, 315
loss function, 260, 381
loss term, 382
lower-triangular matrix, 101
Maclaurin series, 143
Manhattan norm, 71
MAP, 300
MAP estimation, 269

margin, 374
marginal, 190
marginal likelihood, 186, 286, 306
marginal probability, 179
marginalization property, 184 Markov random field, 283 matrix, 22
matrix factorization, 98 maximum a posteriori, 300
maximum a posteriori estimation, 269 maximum likelihood, 257
maximum likelihood estimate, 296 maximum likelihood estimation, 265,
293
mean, 187
mean function, 309
mean vector, 198
measure, 180
median, 188
metric, 76
minimal, 44
minimax inequality, 234
misfit term, 302
mixture model, 349
mixture weight, 349
mode, 188
model, 251
model evidence, 286
model selection, 258
Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse, 35
multidimensional scaling, 136 multiplication by scalars, 37 multivariate, 178
multivariate Gaussian distribution, 198 multivariate Taylor series, 166
natural parameters, 212
negative log-likelihood, 265
nested cross-validation, 258, 284
neutral element, 36
noninvertible, 24
nonsingular, 24
norm, 71
normal distribution, 197
normal equation, 86
normal vector, 80
null space, 33, 47, 58
numerator layout, 150
Occam's razor, 285
ONB, 79
one-hot encoding, 364
ordered basis, 50
orthogonal, 77
orthogonal basis, 79
orthogonal complement, 79
orthogonal matrix, 78
orthonormal, 77
orthonormal basis, 79



outer product, 38
overfitting, 262, 271, 299
PageRank, 114
parameters, 61
parametric equation, 61
partial derivative, 146
particular solution, 27, 30
PCA, 317
pdf, 181
penalty term, 263
pivot, 30
plane, 62
plate, 281
population mean and covariance, 191 positive definite, 71, 73, 74, 76
posterior, 185, 269
posterior odds, 287
power iteration, 334
power series representation, 145 PPCA, 340
preconditioner, 230
predictor, 12, 255
primal problem, 234
principal component, 322
principal component analysis, 136, 317
principal subspace, 327
prior, 185, 269
prior odds, 287
probabilistic inverse, 186
probabilistic PCA, 340
probabilistic programming, 278
probability, 175
probability density function, 181 probability distribution, 172 probability integral transform, 217 probability mass function, 178 product rule, 184
projection, 82
projection error, 88
projection matrix, 82
pseudo-inverse, 86
random variable, 172, 175
range, 58
rank, 47
rank deficient, 47
rank-k approximation, 130
rank-nullity theorem, 60
raw-score formula for variance, 193 recognition network, 344
reconstruction error, 88, 327
reduced hull, 388
reduced row-echelon form, 31 reduced SVD, 129
REF, 30
regression, 289
regular, 24
regularization, 262, 302, 382

regularization parameter, 263, 302, 380 regularized least squares, 302 regularizer, 263, 302, 380, 382
representer theorem, 384
responsibility, 352
reverse mode, 161
right-singular vectors, 119
RMSE, 298
root mean square error, 298 rotation, 91
rotation matrix, 92
row, 22
row vector, 22, 38
row-echelon form, 30
sample mean, 192
sample space, 175
scalar, 37
scalar product, 72
sigmoid, 213
similar, 56
singular, 24
singular value decomposition, 119 singular value equation, 124 singular value matrix, 119 singular values, 119
slack variable, 379
soft margin SVM, 379, 380
solution, 20
span, 44
special solution, 27
spectral clustering, 136
spectral norm, 131
spectral theorem, 111
spectrum, 106
square matrix, 25
standard basis, 45
standard deviation, 190
standard normal distribution, 198 standardization, 336
statistical independence, 194 statistical learning theory, 265 stochastic gradient descent, 231 strong duality, 236
sufficient statistics, 210
sum rule, 184
support point, 61
support vector, 384
supporting hyperplane, 242
surjective, 48
SVD, 119
SVD theorem, 119
symmetric, 73, 76
symmetric matrix, 25 symmetric, positive definite, 74
symmetric, positive semidefinite, 74 system of linear equations, 20
target space, 175


Taylor polynomial, 142, 166
Taylor series, 142
test error, 300
test set, 262, 284
Tikhonov regularization, 265
trace, 103
training, 12
training error, 300
training set, 260, 292
transfer function, 315
transformation matrix, 51
translation vector, 63
transpose, 25, 38
triangle inequality, 71, 76
truncated SVD, 129
Tucker decomposition, 136
underfitting, 271
undirected graphical model, 283 uniform distribution, 182
univariate, 178
unscented transform, 170
upper-triangular matrix, 101
validation set, 263, 284
variable selection, 316
variance, 190
vector, 37
vector addition, 37
vector space, 37
vector space homomorphism, 48 vector space with inner product, 73 vector subspace, 39
weak duality, 235
zero-one loss, 381


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































